                                                                             System Level Synthesis
                                                            James Anderson, John C. Doyle, Steven Low, Nikolai Matni

                                                                                        April 4, 2019
arXiv:1904.01634v1 [math.OC] 2 Apr 2019




                                                                                           Abstract
                                                    This article surveys the System Level Synthesis framework, which presents a novel perspec-
                                                tive on constrained robust and optimal controller synthesis for linear systems. We show how
                                                SLS shifts the controller synthesis task from the design of a controller to the design of the en-
                                                tire closed loop system, and highlight the benefits of this approach in terms of scalability and
                                                transparency. We emphasize two particular applications of SLS, namely large-scale distributed
                                                optimal control and robust control. In the case of distributed control, we show how SLS allows
                                                for localized controllers to be computed, extending robust and optimal control methods to large-
                                                scale systems under practical and realistic assumptions. In the case of robust control, we show
                                                how SLS allows for novel design methodologies that, for the first time, quantify the degradation
                                                in performance of a robust controller due to model uncertainty – such transparency is key in
                                                allowing robust control methods to interact, in a principled way, with modern techniques from
                                                machine learning and statistical inference. Throughout, we emphasize practical and efficient
                                                computational solutions, and demonstrate our methods on easy to understand case studies.


                                          1    Introduction
                                          The systems we seek to design and control are becoming increasingly complex, be it in their
                                          dynamics, their scale, or their interaction with the environment. To address this complexity,
                                          control methods must be able to accommodate the large-scale distributed nature of many of these
                                          systems (e.g., smart-grids, intelligent transportation systems, software defined networks). But this
                                          in itself is often not sufficient, as certain components of the system, or the environment in which
                                          it must interact, are too difficult or impossible to model from first principles, thus motivating a
                                          principled integration of data-driven techniques. While there has been a tremendous amount of
                                          work in each of these areas, usually targeting a specific problem setting, what is lacking is a unified
                                          framework that allows for all of these issues to be simultaneously addressed in a principled manner.
                                          This paper summarizes our progress towards developing such a unified framework in the context of
                                          linear optimal control. As we describe in more detail below, by moving from controller synthesis to
                                          System Level Synthesis, wherein the closed loop behavior and properties of the system are directly
                                          optimized over, we are able to make significant improvements over the state of the art in terms of
                                          computational scalability, richness of problems that can be tackled, and the principled integration
                                          of models produced by data-driven methods, among other things.
                                              We begin by providing a brief overview of relevant results from classical optimal control, robust
                                          control, and distributed optimal control. We then highlight our main contributions, and end this
                                          section by providing a roadmap to the reader for the rest of the paper. Our goal is to convey
                                          the core concepts of SLS to as broad an audience as possible, while also providing deep dives


                                                                                               1
into specific domains (such as robust and distributed control), in hopes of appealing to both the
interested graduate student (be they specializing in control theory, optimization, machine learning,
or artificial intelligence), as well as the domain experts.

1.1     Prior Work
1.1.1    Classical Controller Parameterizations and Synthesis Results
The foundation of many optimal controller synthesis procedures is a parameterization of all inter-
nally stabilizing controllers, and the responses that they achieve, over which relevant performance
measures can be easily optimized. For finite dimensional linear-time-invariant (LTI) systems, the
class of internally stabilizing LTI feedback controllers is characterized by the celebrated Youla pa-
rameterization [1] and the closely related factorization approach [2]. In [1], the authors showed
that the Youla parameterization defines an isomorphism between a stabilizing controller and the
resulting closed loop system response from sensors to actuators – therefore rather than synthesizing
the controller itself, this system response (or Youla parameter) could be directly optimized. This
allowed for the incorporation of customized design specifications on the closed loop system into the
controller design process via convex optimization [3] or interpolation [4]. Subsequently, analogous
parameterizations of stabilizing controllers for more general classes of systems were developed: no-
table examples include the polynomial approach [5] for generalized Rosenbrock systems [6] and the
behavioral approach [7, 8, 9, 10] for linear differential systems. These results illustrate the power
and generality of the Youla parameterization and factorization approaches to optimal control in
the centralized setting. Together with state-space methods, they played a major role in shifting
controller synthesis from an ad hoc, loop-at-a-time tuning process to a principled one with well
defined notions of optimality, and in the LTI setting, paved the way for the foundational results of
robust and optimal control that would follow [11].

1.1.2    Robust Control
Building on these classical results, a rich line of work looked to explicitly account for modeling
uncertainty in the design procedure. In particular, systems were typically viewed as being composed
of a nominal system estimate and a set of unknown but bounded model errors. It was therefore
necessary to ensure that the computed controller ensured stability and performance guarantees
for any such admissible realization. When modeling errors to the nominal system are allowed to
be arbitrary norm-bounded linear time-invariant (LTI) operators in feedback with the nominal
plant, traditional small-gain theorems and robust synthesis techniques can be applied to exactly
solve the problem [12, 13]. However, when the errors are known to have more structure there are
more sophisticated techniques based on structured singular values and corresponding µ-synthesis
techniques [14, 15, 16, 17] or integral quadratic constraints (IQCs) [18].
    While theoretically appealing and much less conservative than traditional small-gain approaches,
the resulting synthesis methods are both computationally intractable (although effective heuristics
do exist) and difficult to interpret analytically. In particular, we know of no results in the literature
that bound the degradation in performance of controlling an uncertain system in terms of the
size of the perturbations affecting it. While traditional results in robust control considered fixed
model uncertainty, in the data-driven and learning based control setting, analytic interpretability of
the effects uncertainty size are essential in obtaining sample-complexity bounds for these methods
[19, 20, 21, 22].

                                                   2
1.1.3    Distributed Control
However, as control engineers shifted their attention from centralized to distributed optimal control,
it was observed that the parameterization approaches that were so fruitful in the centralized set-
ting were no longer directly applicable. In contrast to centralized systems, modern cyber-physical
systems (CPS) are large-scale, physically distributed, and interconnected. Rather than a logically
centralized controller, these systems are composed of several sub-controllers, each equipped with
their own sensors and actuators – these sub-controllers exchange locally available information (such
as sensor measurements or applied control actions) via a communication network. These informa-
tion sharing constraints make the corresponding distributed optimal controller synthesis problem
challenging to solve [23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. In particular, imposing such structural constraints on
the controller can lead to optimal control problems that are NP-hard [29, 30].
    Despite these technical and conceptual challenges, a body of work [26, 31, 27, 25, 24, 28] that
began in the early 2000s, and that culminated with the introduction of “quadratic invariance”
(QI) in the seminal paper [25], showed that for a large class of practically relevant LTI systems,
such internal structure could be integrated with the Youla parameterization and still preserve the
convexity of the optimal controller synthesis task. Informally, a system is quadratically invariant if
sub-controllers are able to exchange information with each other faster than their control actions
propagate through the CPS [32]. Even more remarkable is that this condition is tight, in the sense
that QI is a necessary [33] and sufficient [25] condition for subspace constraints (defined by, for
example, communication delays) on the controller to be enforceable via convex constraints on the
Youla parameter. The identification of QI triggered an explosion of results in distributed optimal
controller synthesis [34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42] – these results showed that the robust and
optimal control methods that proved so powerful for centralized systems could be ported to the
distributed setting. As far as we are aware, no such results exist for the more general classes of
systems considered in [5, 7, 8, 9, 10].
    However, a fact that is not emphasized in the distributed optimal control literature is that
distributed controllers are actually more complex to synthesize and implement than their centralized
counterparts.1 In particular, a major limitation of the QI framework is that, for strongly connected
systems,2 it cannot provide a convex characterization of localized controllers, in which local sub-
controllers only access a subset of system-wide measurements. This need for global exchange
of information between sub-controllers is a limiting factor in the scalability of the synthesis and
implementation of these distributed optimal controllers.

1.2     Main Contributions
Motivated by the issues raised above, we propose a novel parameterization of internally stabilizing
controllers and the closed loop responses that they achieve, providing an alternative approach to
constrained optimal and robust controller synthesis. Specifically, rather than directly designing
only the feedback loop between sensors and actuators, as in the Youla framework, we propose
directly designing the entire closed loop response of the system, as captured by the maps from
process and measurement disturbances to control actions and states. As such, we call the pro-
   1
     For example, see the solutions presented in [34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42] and the message passing implemen-
tation suggested in [42].
   2
     We say that a plant is strongly connected if the state of any subsystem can eventually alter the state of all other
subsystems.



                                                           3
posed method a System Level Approach (SLA) to controller synthesis, which is composed of three
elements: System Level Parameterizations (SLPs), System Level Constraints (SLCs) and System
Level Synthesis (SLS) problems. Further, in contrast to the QI framework, which seeks to impose
structure on the input/output map between sensor measurements and control actions, the SLA
imposes structural constraints on the system response itself, and shows that this structure carries
over to the internal realization of the corresponding controller. It is this conceptual shift from
structure on the input/output map to the internal realization of the controller that allows us to
expand the class of structured controllers that admit a convex characterization, and in doing so,
vastly increase the scalability of distributed optimal control methods. Further, by moving our fo-
cus from controllers to system responses, we are able to make transparent the effects of modeling
uncertainty and approximations on controller synthesis and performance. We summarize our main
contributions below.
    This paper summarizes, and in some places extends, our recent theoretical and computational
contributions [43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 19] to the area of constrained optimal
and robust controller synthesis. In particular, we

   • define and analyze the system level approach to controller synthesis, which is built around
     novel SLPs of all stabilizing controllers and the closed loop responses that they achieve;

   • in the state-feedback setting, we show that the above parameterizations are stable under small
     perturbations, leading to novel robust control problems that, among other features, allow us
     to bound performance degradation as a function of modeling uncertainty size;

   • show that SLPs allow us to constrain the closed loop response of the system to lie in arbitrary
     sets: we call such constraints on the system SLCs. If these SLCs admit a convex representa-
     tion, then the resulting set of constrained system responses admits a convex representation
     as well;

   • show that such constrained system responses can be used to directly implement a controller
     achieving them – in particular, any SLC imposed on the system response imposes a corre-
     sponding SLC on the internal structure of the resulting controller;

   • show that the set of constrained stabilizing controllers that admit a convex parameterization
     using SLPs and SLCs is a strict superset of those that can be parameterized using quadratic
     invariance – hence we provide a generalization of the QI framework, characterizing the broad-
     est known class of constrained controllers that admit a convex parameterization;

   • formulate and analyze the SLS problem, which exploits SLPs and SLCs to define the broadest
     known class of constrained optimal control problems that can be solved using convex pro-
     gramming. We show that the optimal control problems considered in the QI literature [24],
     as well as the recently defined localized optimal control framework [46] are all special cases
     of SLS problems;

   • show that if locality constraints are imposed on the system response, and the SLCs admit a
     certain (partial) decomposability property, the computational complexity of controller syn-
     thesis and implementation can be made to scale as O(1) relative the size of the full system,
     assuming sufficient parallel computation.



                                                   4
1.3    Paper Structure
The paper is organized as follows. We begin with a gentle warmup in Section 2, wherein we consider
full-state-feedback problems over a finite time horizon – by restricting ourselves to this simplified
setting, we are able to build up nearly all of the core machinery of SLS with minimal technical
overhead. We show how several known optimal and robust control synthesis problems can be
posed in the SLS framework, essentially turning (robust) optimal control problems into (robust)
optimization problems over system responses.
    In Section 3 we formally present the general optimal control problem formulation, and briefly
review classical solution approaches. With this information in hand, the finite time horizon results
of Section 2 are extended to the infinite horizon setting in Section 4. The notion of locality is
introduced in Section 4.2 and then used to show how to decompose the synthesis problem into
uncoupled subproblems of reduced dimension in Section 4.3. We end with a robust extension
of the previous results, and show how it can be used to guarantee near-optimal performance of
computationally tractable solutions to SLS problems. Finally, in Section 5, we extend these results
to the output-feedback setting. We end with conclusions in Section 6.


2     Working with System Responses
To introduce the notion of a system response, and to illustrate some of its benefits, we begin by
considering linear optimal control problems over a finite time horizon with full state-feedback. We
show how the corresponding controller synthesis task can be cast as an optimization over the closed
loop behavior of the system, i.e., over system responses, as opposed to over the controller itself. By
initially restricting ourselves to a finite time horizon, we are not burdened by the technical overhead
associated with system stability, controller internal stability, or infinite dimensional optimization
problems. In subsequent sections, we build upon the material presented here and extend these
methods to infinite horizon problems, distributed control problems, and to the output-feedback
setting.

2.1    Finite-horizon System Level Synthesis
Consider the linear-time-varying (LTV) system
                                       xt+1 = At xt + Bt ut + wt ,                                   (2.1)
where xt ∈ Rn is the state, ut ∈ Rp is the control input, and wt ∈ Rn is an exogenous disturbance
process. Our goal is to study the behavior of this system over the horizon t = 0, . . . , T when the
control input ut is a causal LTV state-feedback controller, i.e., ut = Kt (x0 , x1 , . . . , xt ) for some
linear map Kt . To do so, we introduce the following signals and block-lower-triangular matrices:
                                                
                                        x0             0,0                          
                   x0          u0         w0              K
                  x1        u1                       K 1,1 K 1,0                  
            x =  .  , u =  .  w =  w1  , K =  .                                   ,           (2.2)
                                                                                  
                    .           .         ..               .     . .   . .
                  .         .                          .          .     .           
                                          . 
                  xT           uT                          K T,T · · · K T,1 K T,0
                                           wT −1
where here K should be thought of as the matrix representation of the convolution operator induced
by the linear-time-varying controller Kt such that ut = Kt,? x, for Kt,? the t-th row of K.

                                                    5
     Further, we let Z be the block-downshift operator, i.e., a matrix with identity matrices along
its first block sub-diagonal and zeros elsewhere, and define

              A := blkdiag (A0 , A1 , . . . , AT −1 , 0) , B := blkdiag (B0 , B1 , . . . , BT −1 , 0) .

Note that in the linear-time-invariant (LTI) setting, A and B are block diagonal matrices with the
same matrix being repeated along the diagonal. Using these definitions allows us to compactly
rewrite the behavior of the system (2.1) over the horizon t = 0, . . . , T as

                                          x = ZAx + ZBu + w
                                                                                                          (2.3)
                                            = Z(A + BK)x + w.

   In particular, the closed loop behavior of our system under the feedback law K can be entirely
characterized by the following maps,

                                      x = (I − Z(A + BK))−1 w
                                                                                                          (2.4)
                                      u = K(I − Z(A + BK))−1 w,

which describe the closed loop transfer functions from the exogenous disturbance w to the state
x and control input u, respectively. These maps are what we call system responses, and we now
show how optimal controller synthesis can be performed by directly optimizing over these system
responses, as opposed to the controller map K itself.
    To that end, we introduce two additional lower-block-triangular operators
                      0,0                              0,0                     
                       Φx                                 Φu
                      Φ1,1  Φ1,0                        Φu1,1 Φu1,0
                      x        x
                                                                                 
               Φx =  .                          , Φ  =                           .       (2.5)
                                                                                
                        .     . .   . .            u      .
                                                            .   . .    . .
                      .          .     .               .         .      .      
                      ΦT,T
                        x    · · · ΦT,1
                                      x   ΦT,0
                                           x             ΦT,T
                                                           u    · · · ΦT,1
                                                                         u   ΦT,0
                                                                              u

Here we use Φx to denote the system response describing the map from w → x, and similarly,
Φu to denote the system response describing the map from w → u – this allows us to compactly
rewrite equation (2.4) as                      
                                       x         Φx
                                            =        w.                                (2.6)
                                       u         Φu
    Our objective is to optimize directly over these system responses {Φx , Φu }: in order to do so, we
must ensure that there exists a linear-time-varying controller K such that equations (2.4) and (2.6)
are equivalent. The next theorem shows that enforcing the system responses to obey the system
dynamics is necessary and sufficient to ensure the existence of such a corresponding controller, i.e.,
to ensure that the pair {Φx , Φu } is achievable.
Theorem 2.1. Over the horizon t = 0, . . . , T , the system dynamics (2.1) with block-lower-triangular
state feedback law K defining the control action as u = Kx, the following are true
  1. the affine subspace defined by
                                                           
                                                         Φx
                                              I − ZA −ZB      = I,                                        (2.7)
                                                           Φu

      parameterizes all possible system responses (2.6).

                                                         6
  2. for any block-lower-triangular matrices {Φx , Φu } satisfying (2.7), the controller K = Φu Φ−1
                                                                                                 x
     achieves the desired response.

Proof. Proof of 1.: Let K be any block-lower-triangular operator, and u = Kx. Then as argued
above, we have that
                               x = (I − Z(A + BK))−1 w
                               u = K(I − Z(A + BK))−1 w.
It is then easily seen that
                        (I − Z(A + BK))−1
                                            
                                               = (I − ZA − ZBK)(I − Z(A + BK))−1 = I.
       
        I − ZA − ZB
                          K(I − Z(A + BK))−1

Proof of 2.: First notice that the affine constraint (2.7) implies that Φt,0
                                                                         x = I for t = 0, . . . , T , and
hence Φ−1
        x   exists. Let K  = Φ  Φ
                               u x
                                  −1 and notice that


                                   x = (I − Z(A + BΦu Φ−1  −1
                                                       x )) w.

But we then have that

(I − Z(A + BΦu Φ−1
                x ))
                    −1
                       = ((I − ZA)Φx − ZBΦu )Φ−1
                                              x )
                                                 −1
                                                    = Φx ((I − ZA)Φx − ZBΦu )−1 = Φx

where the last equality follows form the fact that {Φx , Φu } satisfy (2.7). Similarly we have that

                                u = Φu Φ−1        −1
                                        x x = Φu Φx Φx w = Φu w,

where the second equality follows from the fact that x = Φx w.
    At this point we emphasize that there is nothing “distributed” about the formulation or Theo-
rem 2.1. As we will see in later sections, the implications of Theorem 2.1 and its various general-
izations will provide the building blocks for a unified and scalable distributed control framework.
    Finally, before providing examples of how this parameterization can be used to formulate SLS
problems, we make a small comment on controller realization. Even in the finite horizon setting,
where no issues relating internal stability arise, one may wish to avoid inverting the matrix Φx to
compute the map K – reasons may include numerical ill-condition and prohibitive computational
cost for larger horizons. We show here that one can instead implement this inverse using a particular
feedback interconnection – in particular, one can show that the following implementation:
                                         PT
                                   ut =         Φu (t, τ )ŵt−τ
                                         PTτ =1
                                             −1
                                x̂t+1 =    τ =1 Φx (t + 1, τ + 1)ŵt−τ
                                                                                                   (2.8)
                                   ŵt = xt+1 − x̂t+1 ,

leads to the desired mapping K = Φu Φ−1    x from x → u. An added benefit of this realization,
which we exploit heavily in the sequel, is that any structure imposed on the system level response
{Φx , Φu } carries over directly to the internal structure of the controller realization, allowing a
natural and transparent way to impose distributed constraints on the controller realization.




                                                   7
2.2     System Level Synthesis
The benefit of the previous parameterization is that the system behavior is now entirely defined in
terms of affine functions of the disturbance process (i.e., (2.7)), and further to ensure achievability
it suffices to constrain the maps {Φx , Φu } to lie in an affine space. We now show how this can be
used to turn standard optimal control problems in to convex optimization problems. The process
of converting an optimal control problem to one over system responses consists of three steps:
  1. Rewrite the problem using the vector notation (2.2).
  2. Set x = Φx w, and u = Φu w, and constrain {Φx , Φu } to lie in the affine space (2.7).
  3. Use knowledge about the disturbance process w to derive an appropriate objective function
     (see below for LQR, H∞ , and L1 optimal control).
We now provide some worked examples of classical centralized control problem posed in the SLS
framework.

2.2.1    LQR with no driving noise and known x0
Here we let                                          
                                                     x0
                                                    0
                                                w =  . .                                        (2.9)
                                                     
                                                     .. 
                                                          0
   For simplicity of notation, we assume that uT is included in the cost functional, i.e., that the
optimal control problem that we seek to solve is given by
                                     PT     T          T
                           minxt ,ut   t=0 xt Qt xt + ut Rt ut
                         subject to xt+1 = Axt + But , t = 0, . . . , T − 1,                 (2.10)
                                     x0 known.
   Using vector notation, this problem can be written as
                                             " 1        #  2
                                              Q2     0    x
                                    minx,u            1
                                               0 R    2   u                                     (2.11)
                                                             F
                                 subject to x = ZAx + ZBu,
where
                   Q := blkdiag(Q0 , Q1 , . . . , QT ), R := blkdiag(R0 , R1 , . . . , RT ).    (2.12)
   Now, we use the fact that x = Φx w = Φx (:, 0)x0 and u = Φu w = Φu (:, 0)x0 , where we use
Φ(:, 0) to denote the first block column of a matrix Φ, and Theorem 2.1, to cast this problem as
an optimization over system responses:
                                          " 1      #                2
                                           Q2   0     Φx (:, 0)
                              minΦx ,Φu          1                x0
                                           0 R 2 Φu (:, 0)                                 (2.13)
                                                                    F
                                                       Φx (:, 0)
                             subject to I − ZA −ZB                     = I,
                                                          Φu (:, 0)
which can be expressed as a convex quadratic program.

                                                      8
2.2.2   LQR with driving noise and random x0
              i.i.d.
Here we let w ∼ N (0, Σw ). For simplicity of notation, we assume that uT is included in the cost
functional, i.e., that the optimal control problem that we seek to solve is given by
                                            PT      T          T
                                                                        
                                  minxt ,ut   t=0 E xt Qt xt + ut Rt ut                    (2.14)
                                subject to xt+1 = Axt + But + wt .
   Following the same steps as the previous subsection, this problem can be rewritten as
                                          " 1       #          2
                                           Q2    0    Φx 1/2
                             minΦx ,Φu            1         Σw
                                            0 R 2 Φu                                       (2.15)
                                                            F
                                                        Φx
                            subject to I − ZA −ZB               = I,
                                                           Φu
where Q and R are as defined above. Once again, this problem can be expressed as a convex
quadratic program.

2.2.3   H∞ optimal control
Consider the following H∞ optimal control problem
                                              PT     >          >
                          minx,u maxkwk2 ≤1     t=0 xt Qt xt + ut Rt ut                    (2.16)
                                  subject to xt+1 = Axt + But + wt .
,
   which can be rewritten in vector notation as
                                                  1
                                                   "    #  2
                                                Q2   0    x
                            minx,u maxkwk2 ≤1         1
                                                 0 R2 u 2                                  (2.17)
                                   subject to x = ZAx + ZBu + w.
    Now, using that x = Φx w and u = Φu w, we can rewrite our control problem in terms of system
responses as follows
                                                   " 1      2 #
                                                    Q2Φx  0
                        minΦx ,Φu maxkwk2 ≤1               w
                                                           1
                                                    0 Φu  R2
                                                          2                              (2.18)
                                                        Φx
                                  subject to I − ZA −ZB        = I.
                                                          Φu
   Now, it suffices to notice that the inner maximization over w is simply the definition of the
spectral norm of the weighted system responses, leading to the final optimization problem over
{Φx , Φu }
                                          "    1     2  #
                                              Q2 Φx0
                              minΦx ,Φu             1
                                              0  ΦuR2
                                                     2→2
                                                                                          (2.19)
                                                   Φx
                             subject to I − ZA −ZB        = I,
                                                     Φu
   which can be expressed as a semidefinite program.

                                                   9
2.2.4   L1 optimal control
The previous subsection optimized the worst case `2 → `2 gain of our system – a similar derivation
can be used to obtain a problem that optimizes the worst case `∞ → `∞ gain of our system. In
particular, we skip a step and simply begin with the following problem in vector notation
                                                 " 1         # 
                                                   Q2     0    x
                            minx,u maxkwk∞ ≤1              1
                                                   0 R     2   u                            (2.20)
                                                                  ∞
                                    subject to x = ZAx + ZBu + w.

    Once again, using that x = Φx w and u = Φu w, we can rewrite our control problem in terms
of system responses as follows
                                                " 1    # 
                                                 Q2 0    Φx
                        minΦx ,Φu maxkwk∞ ≤1         1        w
                                                 0 R 2 Φu                               (2.21)
                                                             ∞
                                                           Φx
                                   subject to I − ZA −ZB          = I.
                                                             Φu
    Now, it suffices to notice that the inner maximization over w is simply the definition of the L1
norm (i.e., the matrix `∞ → `∞ induced norm) of the weighted system responses, leading to the
final optimization problem over {Φx , Φu }
                                              " 1      # 
                                               Q2  0     Φx
                                 minΦx ,Φu           1
                                               0 R 2 Φu ∞→∞                                    (2.22)
                                                             
                                                          Φx
                                subject to I − ZA −ZB            = I,
                                                             Φu
which can be expressed as a linear program.

2.2.5   General Constrained Optimal Control
The four example problems described above can be viewed as specific instantiations of a generic
problem structure. They each contain the System Level Parameterization (SLP) (2.7) as a con-
straint, and the cost-function is some appropriately function of the system responses {Φx , Φu }.
Although not included in the examples above, we could also additionally impose that the system
responses lie in some sets, i.e., that {Φx , Φu } ∈ S, or that the state and input trajectories also lie
in some sets, i.e., that Φx w ∈ X and Φu w ∈ U for all w ∈ W. Recent work in this direction is
presented in [56, 57].
    Combining all of these elements together, we obtain a System Level Synthesis (SLS) problem:

                                min     g(Φx , Φu )                                             (2.23a)
                               Φx ,Φu
                                                              
                                                           Φx
                          subject to        I − ZA −ZB          =I                              (2.23b)
                                                             Φu
                                        {Φx , Φu } ∈ S,                                         (2.23c)
                                        Φx w ∈ X , Φu w ∈ U for all w ∈ W.                      (2.23d)



                                                      10
Clearly, if the objective functions and constraints are chosen to be convex functions, then the SLS
problem is itself convex, as is the case for all of the examples given above.
     To reiterate, the SLP is the affine constraint (2.23b) that ensures the system is achievable over
the horizon t = 0, . . . , T , i.e. it ensures that there exists a controller K such that system response
{Φx , Φu } described by (2.6) and the closed-loops maps w → x and w → u as given by (2.4) are
equivalent. System Level Constraints (SLCs) modeled by (2.23d) force the closed loop response to
lie in a pre-described set S. Typical choices for additional constraints S imposed on the system
responses would include additional performance requirements (resulting in multi-objective control
problems,) and structural constraints (as imposed by distributed constraints), or sparsity surrogate
constraints (as imposed by architectural constraints). In Section 4.2 we will describe a particularly
useful class of SLCs that define spatiotemporal locality constraints. Additionally, the constraints
Φx w ∈ X and Φu w ∈ U can be used to incorporate state and input constraints. Typical choices for
constraints X × U on the state and input trajectories include, for example, polytopic or ellipsoidal
constraints. At this point, the connection between the finite time horizon SLS problem (2.23) and
the subproblems solved in model predictive control should be apparent.

2.3   A new perspective on robustness
Thus far, we have only shown that SLS can be used to cast standard optimal control problems as
optimizations over system responses. As a preview of some of the additional benefits of working
with system responses, we present here a novel robust control synthesis method that allows us to
bound the performance degradation incurred by using approximate system responses that do not
exactly satisfy the achievability constraints (2.7). In later sections, we extend these robustness
results to the infinite horizon setting.
    Our first result is a robust variant of Theorem 2.1, which characterizes the behavior achieved
by a controller built from approximate system responses. Before stating the result, we let
                                          0,0                   
                                           ∆
                                          ∆1,1 ∆1,0             
                                   ∆= .                                                    (2.24)
                                                                
                                          ..    ..    ..        
                                                    .     .      
                                          ∆T,T    ···   ∆T,1 ∆T,0
be an arbitrary block-lower-triangular matrix.
Theorem 2.2. Let ∆ be defined as in equation (2.24), and suppose that {Φx , Φu } satisfy
                                               
                                             Φx
                              I − ZA −ZB             = I + ∆.                            (2.25)
                                                Φu

    If (I + ∆i,0 )−1 exists for i = 1, . . . , T , then the controller K = Φu Φ−1
                                                                               x achieves the system
response                                  
                                         x          Φx
                                               =        (I + ∆)−1 w                            (2.26)
                                         u          Φu

Proof. If (I + ∆i,0 )−1 exists for i = 1, . . . , T , then so does (I + ∆)−1 . Therefore the constraint
(2.25) is equivalent to                                
                                                    Φx
                                                           (I + ∆)−1 = I.
                               
                                I − ZA −ZB                                                       (2.27)
                                                       Φu

                                                   11
   Then noting that K = Φu Φ−1              −1            −1 −1
                             x = Φu (I + ∆) (Φx (I + ∆) ) , we have, by Theorem 2.1, that
the controller K = Φu Φ−1
                       x achieves the system responses (2.26).

     We now present a simple example of how this theorem can be used to compute a controller that
is robust to parametric uncertainty in the system dynamics (A, B) – we return to this theorem and
its infinite horizon analog later in the text, at which point we present several other use-cases.
     Suppose that rather than having access to the true system dynamics (A, B), we instead only have
access to estimates (A,  b and further let {Φ̂x , Φ̂u } satisfy the achievability constraints defined by
                       b B),
  b B).
(A,   b Then simple algebra shows that the approximate system responses {Φ̂x , Φ̂u } satisfy
                                                               
                                           Φ̂x               Φ̂x
                              I − ZA −ZB         = I + Z DA DB       ,                           (2.28)
                                             Φ̂u                 Φ̂u

where DA := Ab − A and DB := Bb − B. We can then invoke Theorem 2.2 with
                                                     
                                                   Φ̂x
                                  ∆ := Z DA DB
                                                     Φ̂u

to conclude that the controller K̂ = Φ̂u Φ̂−1
                                           x , computed using only the system estimates (A, B),
                                                                                         b b
achieves the following response on the actual system (A, B):
                                         
                                       x   Φ̂x
                                         =     (I + ∆)−1 w.
                                       u   Φ̂u

   If we further suppose that we have known bounds on our modeling error, i.e., that kDA k2→2 ≤ A
and kDB k2→2 ≤ B , then we can use this insight to formulate a robust SLS problem. Recall that for
matrices, the induced 2 → 2 norm is simply the maximum singular value. For illustrative purposes,
we formulate a robust LQR problem, but the general approach is applicable to any performance
metrics that have a submultiplicative property. In particular, consider the problem presented in
Section 2.2.2, and assume for simplicity that Σw = I. Then, assuming we only have access to the
approximate dynamics (A, b B),
                            b we can pose the following robust optimization problem
                                                 "     1       #         2
                                                     Q2   Φx
                                                           0            −1
                      min          max                      1   (I + ∆)
                     Φx ,Φu kDA k≤A , kDB k≤B      0    Φu
                                                           R2              F                     (2.29)
                                                h           i Φ 
                                                                  x
                                   subject to I − Z Ab −Z Bb        = I.
                                                                Φu
    By considering a performance metric that maximizes over the admissible model uncertainty, we
are able to provide robust performance guarantees over the uncertainty set. However, as posed,
this problem is non-convex and does not admit a computationally efficient solution.
    We can however exploit the structure of the problem to derive a tractable upper bound. In
particular, notice that the effect of the model uncertainty, as captured by the (I + ∆)−1 term, can
be isolated by applying the submultiplicative property of the spectral and frobenius norms, and the
strictly-lower-block-triangular structure of ∆ can be further exploited to compute an upper bound




                                                  12
on its effect. Specifically, we have that
              "    1
                            #                 2   " 1        #         2
                  Q2   0         Φx                  Q2   0         Φx                        2
                        1             (I + ∆)−1   ≤        1                     (I + ∆)−1
                  0    R2        Φu                  0    R2        Φu                        2→2
                                                F                            F
                                                    " 1        #           2   T −1
                                                                                                  !2
                                                     Q2   0         Φx           X
                                                  ≤        1                            k∆kt2→2        ,
                                                     0    R2        Φu
                                                                             F   t=0

where the first inequality follows from the submultiplicative property of the spectral and Frobenius
norms, and the second inequality by noticing that because ∆ is strictly-lower-block-triangular, the
inverse can be expressed as a finite series and applying the submultiplicative property and the
triangle inequality.
    Finally, we note that using Proposition 3.5 from [19], we can upper bound the spectral norm of
∆ as follows:
                                                              √  Φ
                                                 
                                                Φ̂x
                                                            ≤ 2 A x
                                      
                       k∆k2→2 = Z DA DB                                       .
                                                  Φ̂u 2→2          B Φu 2→2

   Leveraging these two inequalities, we can now write a tractable (quasi-convex) optimization
problem that provides an upper-bound to our original robust optimization problem (2.29).

                                    T −1
                                               !2   " 1        #    2
                                    X
                                           t         Q2   0     Φx
                            min         τ     min          1
                             τ               Φx ,Φu  0    R2    Φu
                                    t=0
                                                    h             i ΦF 
                                         subject to I − Z A −Z B
                                                           b     b     x
                                                                          =I                               (2.30)
                                                                     Φu
                                                    √ A Φx
                                                      2           ≤ τ.
                                                        B Φu 2→2
    Thus, by leveraging the transparent mapping of system uncertainty to system performance, we
were able to derive a tractable upper bound that produces a controller that is both guaranteed to
be robustly stabilizing and performant. Further, as we show in Section 4.5, this transparency also
allows us to derive bounds on performance degradation as a function of the uncertainty sizes A and
B . Although we defer presenting this result to the infinite horizon setting, as the computations
become less cumbersome in that case, we note that analogous, albeit messier, degradation bounds
can be derived for the robust optimization problem (2.30).


3     Preliminaries and Notation
We now formally introduce the infinite horizon optimal control problems that we solve in this paper.

3.1   Notation
We use lower and upper case Latin letters such as x and A to denote vectors and matrices, re-
spectively, and lower and upper case boldface Latin letters such as x and G to denote signals and
transfer matrices, respectively. We use calligraphic letters such as S to denote sets. In the interest
of clarity, we work with discrete time linear time invariant systems, but unless stated otherwise, all


                                                    13
results extend naturally to the continuous time setting. We use standard definitions of the Hardy
spaces H2 and H∞ , and denote their restriction to the set of real-rational proper transfer matrices
by RH2 and P  RH∞ . We use G(i) to denote the ith spectral component of a transfer function G,
i.e., G(z) = ∞       1
                i=0 z i G(i) for |z| > 1. We use FT to denote the space of finite impulse response
(FIR) transfer matrices with horizon T , i.e., FT := {G ∈ RH∞ | G = Ti=0 z1i G(i)}. We frequently
                                                                       P

use the notation G ∈ z1 RH∞ to denote that G is strictly proper. Informally this can be parsed
as zG ∈ RH∞ . Finally, we use G(T1 : T2 ) to denote the projection of G onto FT⊥1 ∩ FT2 , i.e.,
G(T1 : T2 ) = Ti=T
              P 2 1
                    1 zi
                         G(i).

3.2   System Model
We consider discrete time linear time invariant (LTI) systems of the form

                               x[t + 1] = Ax[t] + B1 w[t] + B2 u[t]                           (3.1a)
                                   z̄[t] = C1 x[t] + D11 w[t] + D12 u[t]                     (3.1b)
                                   y[t] = C2 x[t] + D21 w[t] + D22 u[t]                       (3.1c)

where x, u, w, y, z̄ are the state vector, control action, external disturbance, measurement, and
regulated output, respectively. Equation (3.1) can be written in state space form as
                                                    
                                      A B1 B2                        
                                                           P 11  P 12
                              P =  C1 D11 D12  =
                                                           P21 P22
                                     C2 D21 D22

where Pij = Ci (zI − A)−1 Bj + Dij . We refer to P as the open loop plant model.
   Consider a dynamic output feedback control law u = Ky. The controller K is assumed to have
the state space realization

                                    ξ[t + 1] = Ak ξ[t] + Bk y[t]                              (3.2a)
                                              u[t] = Ck ξ[t] + Dk y[t],                      (3.2b)

where ξ is the internal state of the controller. We have K = Ck (zI − Ak )−1 Bk + Dk . A schematic
diagram of the interconnection of the plant P and the controller K is shown in Figure 1.

                                     z̄            P11       P12   w
                                                   P21       P22
                                          y                        u
                                                         K


                    Figure 1: Interconnection of the plant P and controller K.

   The following assumptions are made throughout the paper.
Assumption 1. The interconnection in Figure 1 is well-posed – the matrix (I−D22 Dk ) is invertible.
Assumption 2. Both the plant and the controller realizations are stabilizable and detectable; i.e.,
(A, B2 ) and (Ak , Bk ) are stabilizable, and (A, C2 ) and (Ak , Ck ) are detectable.

                                                         14
    Note that assumption ?? The goal of the optimal control problem is to find a controller K
to stabilize the plant P and minimize a suitably chosen norm3 of the closed loop transfer matrix
from external disturbance w to regulated output z̄. This leads to the following centralized optimal
control formulation:

                                minimize          ||P11 + P12 K(I − P22 K)−1 P21 ||
                                    K
                              subject to          K internally stabilizes P.                    (3.3)


3.3      Youla Parameterization

    A common technique to solve the optimal control problem (3.3) is via the Youla parameteriza-
tion, which is based on a doubly co-prime factorization of the plant, defined as follows.

Definition 1. A collection of stable transfer matrices, Ur , Vr , Xr , Yr , Ul , Vl , Xl , Yl ∈ RH∞
                                                                     −1
defines a doubly co-prime factorization of P22 if P22 = Vr U−1
                                                             r = Ul Vl and
                                                               
                                            Xl −Yl         Ur Yr
                                                                    = I.
                                           −Vl Ul           Vr Xr

    Such doubly co-prime factorizations can always be computed if P22 is stabilizable and detectable
[58].
    Let Q be the Youla parameter. From [58], problem (3.3) can be reformulated in terms of the
Youla parameter as

                                        minimize         ||T11 + T12 QT21 ||
                                              Q
                                        subject to       Q ∈ RH∞                                (3.4)

with T11 = P11 + P12 Yr Ul P21 , T12 = −P12 Ur , and T21 = Ul P21 .
    The benefit of optimizing over the Youla parameter Q, rather than the controller K, is that
(3.4) is convex with respect to the Youla parameter. One can then incorporate various convex
design specifications [3] in (3.4) to customize the controller synthesis task. Once the optimal Youla
parameter Q, or a suitable approximation thereof, is found in (3.4), we reconstruct the controller
by setting K = (Yr − Ur Q)(Xr − Vr Q)−1 .

3.4      Structured Controller Synthesis and QI
We now move our discussion to the distributed optimal control problem. We follow the paradigm
adopted in [25, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41], and focus on information asymmetry introduced
by delays in the communication network – this is a reasonable modeling assumption when one
has dedicated physical communication channels (e.g., fiber optic channels), but may not be valid
under wireless settings. In the references cited above, locally acquired measurements are exchanged
  3
      Typical choices for the norm include H2 and H∞ .




                                                         15
between sub-controllers subject to delays imposed by the communication network,4 which manifest
as subspace constraints on the controller itself.5
    Let C be a subspace enforcing the information sharing constraints imposed on the controller K.
A distributed optimal control problem can then be formulated as [25, 59, 33, 60]:

                               minimize      kP11 + P12 K(I − P22 K)−1 P21 k
                                    K                                                                         (3.5)
                              subject to     K internally stabilizes P, K ∈ C.

    A summary of the main results from the distributed optimal control literature [25, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41] can be given as follows: if the subspace C is quadratically invariant with respect
to P22 (i.e., KP22 K ∈ C, ∀K ∈ C) [25], then the set of all stabilizing controllers lying in subspace
C can be parameterized by those stable transfer matrices Q ∈ RH∞ satisfying M(Q) ∈ C, for
M(Q) := K(I − P22 K)−1 = (Yr − Ur Q)Ul .6 Further, these conditions can be viewed as tight, in
the sense that quadratic invariance is also a necessary condition [59, 33] for a subspace constraint
C on the controller K to be enforced via a convex constraint on the Youla parameter Q.
    This allows the optimal control problem (3.5) to be recast as the following convex model match-
ing problem:
                                  minimize kT11 + T12 QT21 k
                                      Q                                                           (3.6)
                                 subject to Q ∈ RH∞ , M(Q) ∈ C.

3.5    QI imposes limitations on controller sparsity
When working with large-scale systems, it is natural to impose that sub-controllers only collect
information from a local subset of all other sub-controllers. This can be enforced by setting the
subspace constraint C in problem (3.5) to encode a suitable sparsity pattern Kij = 0,7 for some
i, j. However, if the plant P22 is dense (i.e., if the underlying system is strongly connected), which
may occur even if the system matrices (A, B2 , C2 ) are sparse, then any such sparsity constraint
is not QI condition with respect to the plant P22 : this follows immediately from the algebraic
definition of QI KP22 K ∈ C, ∀K ∈ C. As QI is a necessary and sufficient condition for the
subspace constraint K ∈ C to be enforced via a convex constraint on the Youla parameter Q, we
conclude that for strongly connected systems, any sparsity constraint imposed on the controller K
can only be enforced via a non-convex constraint on Youla parameter. A major motivation for SLS
was to circumvent this limitation of the QI framework.


4     State-Feedback System Level Synthesis
In this section, we extend the results of Section 2 to the infinite horizon setting, and propose a
novel parameterization of internally stabilizing state-feedback controllers centered around system
responses, which are defined by the closed loop maps from process disturbances to state and control
    4
      Note that this delay may range from 0, modeling instantaneous communication between sub-controllers, to
infinite, modeling no communication between sub-controllers.
    5
      For continuous time systems, the delays can be encoded via subspaces that may reside within H∞ as opposed
RH∞ .
    6
      By definition, we have P22 = Vr U−1  r  = U−1l Vl . This implies that the transfer matrices Ur and Ul are both
invertible. Therefore, M is an invertible affine map of the Youla parameter Q.
    7
      Kij denotes the (i, j)-entry of the transfer matrix K.


                                                        16
action. We show that for a given system, the set of stable closed loop system responses that are
achievable by an internally stabilizing LTI controller is an affine subspace of RH∞ , and that
the corresponding internally stabilizing controller achieving the desired system response admits a
particularly simple and transparent realization.
    Consider a state feedback model given by
                                                            
                                             A B1 B2
                                     P =  C1 D11 D12  .                                    (4.1)
                                             I     0     0

   In this case, the state dynamics described in (3.1) reduce to

                                x[t + 1] = Ax[t] + B2 u[t] + B1 w[t].                           (4.2)

   The z-transform of these state dynamics is then given by

                                      (zI − A)x = B2 u + δx ,                                   (4.3)

where we let δx := B1 w denote the disturbance affecting the state.
   Consider now the (dynamic) state-feedback control policy u = Kx and substitute this into (4.3).
After a simple rearrangement the maps Φx : δx → x and Φu : δx → u are seen to be

                                  Φx = (zI − A − B2 K)−1
                                                                                                (4.4)
                                  Φu = K(zI − A − B2 K)−1 .

The resemblance between (2.4) and (4.4) is immediate.




 Figure 2: The proposed state feedback controller structure, with Φ̃x = I − zΦx and Φ̃u = zΦu .

    We now provide an infinite horizon analogue to Theorem 2.1, that ensures that the system
response {Φx , Φu } are achievable by the proposed state-feedback policy u = Kx. As we are now
operating over an infinite horizon, we must take care to provide an internally stable realization for
the controller.

Theorem 4.1. Consider the LTI system (4.2), evolving under a dynamic state-feedback control
policy u = Kx. The following statements are true:




                                                 17
  1. The affine subspace defined by
                                               
                                             Φx                       1
                                  zI − A −B2      = I,      Φx , Φu ∈     RH∞                    (4.5)
                                               Φu                       z
     parameterizes all system responses from δx to (x, u) as defined in (4.4), achievable by an
     internally stabilizing state feedback controller K.
  2. For any transfer matrices {Φx , Φu } satisfying (4.5), the controller K = Φu Φ−1
                                                                                   x , implemented
     as shown in Figure 2 via the following equations:
                                           u = zΦu δ̂x
                                         δ̂x = x + (I − zΦx )δ̂x ,
     is internally stabilizing and achieves the desired system response (4.4).
   The similarities between the finite horizon case given in Theorem 2.1 and those presented in
Theorem 4.1 are striking – this should not be surprising, as the lower-block-triangular operators
we previously considered can be viewed as truncations of the matrix representations of the transfer
matrices {Φx , Φu }.
   At this point the observant reader may have noticed that Theorem 4.1 circumvents the standard
assumptions of stabilizability of the pair (A, B2 ). However this not the case:
Lemma 4.2. The constraint (4.5) is feasible if and only if (A, B2 ) is stabilizable.
Proof. We first show that the stabilizability of (A, B2 ) implies that there exist transfer matrices
Φx , Φu ∈ z1 RH∞ satisfying equation (4.5). From the definition of stabilizability, there exists a
matrix F such that A + B2 F is a stable matrix. Substituting the state feedback control law u = F x
into (4.3), we have x = (zI − A − B2 F )−1 δx and u = F (zI − A − B2 F )−1 δx . The system response
is given by Φx = (zI − A − B2 F )−1 and Φu = F (zI − A − B2 F )−1 , which lie in z1 RH∞ and are a
solution to (4.5).
    For the opposite direction, we note that Φx , Φu ∈ RH∞ implies that these transfer
                                                                                        matricesdo
not have poles outside the unit circle |z| ≥ 1. From (4.3), we further observe that zI − A −B2 is
                                                                                    >
right invertible in the region where Φx and Φu do not have poles, with Φ>        Φ>
                                                                          
                                                                             x    u    being its right
                                                
inverse. This then implies that zI − A −B2 has full row rank for all |z| ≥ 1. This is equivalent
to the PBH test [13] for stabilizability, proving the claim.
    This lemma therefore provides a sanity check: if the system is not stabilizable, then there do not
exist any stable system responses, and hence the constraints are infeasible. We now prove Theorem
4.1.
Proof.[Theorem 4.1] This proof is nearly identical to that of Theorem 2.1, but with the added
complication of ensuring internal stability of the resulting controller.
    Proof of 1.: Let K be any internally stabilizing controller, and set u = Kx. Then as argued
above, we have that
                                 x = (zI − (A + B2 K))−1 δx
                                                                                                 (4.6)
                                 u = K(zI − (A + B2 K))−1 δx .
It is then easily seen that
                     (zI − (A + B2 K))−1
                                            
                                               = (zI − A − B2 K)(zI − (A + B2 K))−1 = I.
      
       zI − A − B2                                                                               (4.7)
                        K(zI − (A + B2 K))−1

                                                 18
    Proof of 2.: First notice that the affine constraint (4.5) implies that Φx (1) = I, and hence Φ−1
                                                                                                   x
exists. We begin by showing that the controller K = Φu Φ−1      x achieves the desired response, and
then show that the implementation suggested in Figure 2 is internally stabilizing. Let K = Φu Φ−1  x
and notice that
                                  x = (zI − (A + B2 Φu Φ−1      −1
                                                            x )) δx .                            (4.8)
But we then have that

 (zI −(A+B2 Φu Φ−1
                x ))
                    −1
                       = ((zI −A)Φx −B2 Φu )Φ−1
                                             x )
                                                −1
                                                   = Φx ((zI −A)Φx −B2 Φu )−1 = Φx (4.9)

where the last equality follows form the fact that {Φx , Φu } satisfy (4.5). Similarly we have that

                                 u = Φu Φ−1        −1
                                         x x = Φu Φx Φx δx = Φu δx ,                                    (4.10)

where the second equality follows from the fact that x = Φx δx .
     Finally, we turn to proving the internal stability of the proposed controller realization shown
in Figure 2, where here Φ̃x = I − zΦx and Φ̃u = zΦu . We first note that from Figure 2, we can
express the state feedback controller K as K = Φ̃u (I − Φ̃x )−1 = (zΦu )(zΦx )−1 = Φu Φ−1   x .
     It can be checked that z Φ̃x , Φ̃u ∈ RH∞ , and hence the internal feedback loop between δ̂x and
the reference state trajectory x̂ is well defined. As is standard, we introduce external perturbations
δx , δy , and δu into the system and note that the perturbations entering other links of the block
diagram can be expressed as a combination of (δx , δy , δu ) being acted upon by some stable transfer
matrices.8 Hence the standard definition of internal stability applies, and we can use a bounded-
input bounded-output argument (e.g., Lemma 5.3 in [58]) to conclude that it suffices to check the
stability of the nine closed loop transfer matrices from perturbations (δx , δy , δu ) to the internal
variables (x, u, δˆx ) to determine the internal stability of the structure as a whole.
     Routine calculations show that the closed loop transfer matrices from (δx , δy , δu ) to (x, u, δ̂x )
are given by                                                        
                                x       Φx −Φ̃x − Φx A        Φx B2      δx
                              u  = Φu Φ̃u − Φu A I + Φu B2  δy  .                           (4.11)
                                        1          1           1
                               δ̂x      z I    I − z A           B
                                                               z 2
                                                                         δ u

As all nine transfer matrices in (4.11) are stable, the implementation in Figure 2 is internally stable.
Furthermore, the desired system response {Φx , Φu }, from δx to (x, u), is achieved.
   With Theorem 4.1 in hand we can now proceed as in the finite horizon case and define the
System Level Synthesis problem. Let us assume that a suitable cost functional g has been chosen
– suitable examples include L1 , H∞ , or H2 objective functions [58]. The general form of an SLS
problem takes the form
                              minΦx ,Φu g(Φx , Φu )        
                                                         Φx
                             subject to zI − A −B2              =I                         (4.12)
                                                           Φu
                                          Φx , Φu ∈ z1 RH∞ ∩ S.
If the objective function g(·) and constraint set S are convex, then optimization problem (4.12)
is a convex but infinite-dimensional problem. The constraint set S can be used to capture addi-
tional constraints to be imposed on the the system response, which in turn translate to constraints
  8
   The matrix A may define an unstable system, but viewed as an element of F0 , defines a stable (FIR) transfer
matrix.


                                                      19
on the internal realization of the controller as illustrated in Figure 2. We note here that if the
system is controllable, then a useful SLC to add is that the system responses are FIR, i.e., that
{Φx , Φu } ∈ FT for some suitably chosen horizon T . In that case, the optimization problem (4.12)
immediately becomes finite dimensional (assuming that the remaining constraints admit finite di-
mensional representations), and further, the controller implementation shown in Figure 2 reduces
to an interconnection of FIR filter banks, greatly simplifying controller deployment. Finally, we
show in Section 4.5 that, modulo some minor technical assumptions and slight modifications to
problem (4.12), taking a sufficiently long FIR horizon T results in near optimal performance.

4.1    Distributed Control, Locality, and Scalability
The key insight that we exploit in this section is that distributed constraints (in the form of sparsity
and delay constraints) can be imposed on the internal blocks of the controller realization shown in
Figure 2 via subspace constraints on the system responses. This idea of imposing structure on the
internal controller realization (i.e., on {Φx , Φu }), instead of on the controller itself (i.e., on the map
K = Φu Φ−1 x ), is what allows us to circumvent the limitations of existing results in the distributed
control literature. This insight, coupled with the observation that many optimal control problems
of interest can be decomposed into parallel subproblems, allows us to scale out distributed control
methods to the large-scale setting with ease.
    Before delving into the technical details, we present a simple example that illustrates some of
the shortcomings in the distributed controls literature that we are able to overcome.

Example 1. Consider the optimal control problem:

                               minimize u limT →∞ T1 Tt=0 Ekx[t]k22
                                                      P
                                                                                                     (4.13)
                                subject to x[t + 1] = Ax[t] + u[t] + w[t],

                       i.i.d
with disturbance w[t] ∼ N (0, I). We assume full state-feedback, i.e., the control action at time t
can be expressed as u[t] = f (x[0 : t]) for some function f . An optimal control policy u? for this
LQR problem is easily seen to be given by u? [t] = −Ax[t].
    Further suppose that the state matrix A is sparse and let its support define the adjacency matrix
of a graph G for which we identify the ith node with the corresponding state/control pair (xi , ui ).
In this case, we have that the optimal control policy u? can be implemented in a localized manner.
In particular, in order to implement the state feedback policy for the ith actuator ui , only those
states xj for which Aij 6= 0 need to be collected – thus only those states corresponding to immediate
neighbors of node i in the graph G, i.e., only local states, need to be collected to compute the
corresponding control action, leading to a localized implementation. As we discuss below, the idea
of locality is essential to allowing controller synthesis and implementation to scale to arbitrarily
large systems, and hence such a structured controller is desirable.
    Now suppose that we naively attempt to solve optimal control problem (4.13) by converting it to
its equivalent H2 model P matching problem (3.5) and constraining the controller K to have the same
support as A, i.e., K = ∞       1
                            t=0 z t K[t], supp K[t] ⊂ supp A. If the graph G is strongly connected, then
any sparsity constraint in the form of Kij = 0 is not QI with respect to the plant P22 = (zI − A)−1 .
To see this, note that if the graph G is strongly connected, then P22 is a dense transfer function:
it then follows immediately that any subspace C enforcing sparsity constraints on K fails to satisfy
KP22 K ∈ C, ∀K ∈ C, and hence is not QI with respect to P22 . The results of [33] further allow us to


                                                    20
conclude that computing such a structured controller can never be done using convex programming
when using the Youla parameterization.
    In contrast, in the case of a full control (B2 = I) problem, the condition (4.5) simplifies to (zI −
A)Φx − Φu = I, Φx , Φu ∈ z1 RH∞ . Again, suppose that we wish to synthesize an optimal controller
that has a communication topology given by the support of A – from the above implementation, it
suffices to constrain the support of transfer matrices Φx and Φu to be a subset of that of A. It can
be checked that Φx = z1 I, and Φu = − z1 A satisfy the above constraints, and recover the globally
optimal controller K = −A.

4.2   Spatial and Temporal Locality
As mentioned above, the constraint set S can be used to impose distributed constraints on the
controller realization – in this section we describe a useful such class of constraints that enforce
locality in the system responses. In particular, in addition to the FIR constraints described above,
which can be interpreted as localizing the system responses in time, we also ask that the system
response be spatially localized.
      The notion of temporal locality ensures that the closed-loop disturbance response has a finite-
impulse response. Furthermore, it ensures that the resulting System Level Synthesis problem is a
finite-dimensional mathematical program. Spatial locality ensures that when a disturbance enters
the system, its effect is felt only in a local neighborhood of the origin. Spatiotemporal locality, as
well as being desirable from a performance perspective, will also make computation tractable. We
begin by introducing spatial locality.
      The network structure of the system is naturally modeled by a graph G(V, E). In this setting
the vertices vi ∈ V denote subsystems and the unweighted edges, eij := (vi , vj ) ∈ E ⊂ V × V with
vi , vj ∈ V , indicate that subsystem j affects subsystem i. As a distance metric on G we use the
length of the shortest path from vi to vj which we denote by dist(vi → vj ).

Definition 1. For the unweighted graph G, the d-outgoing set of subsystem i is outvi (d) :=
{vj | dist(vi → vj ) ≤ d}. Analogously, the d-incoming set of subsystem i is invi := {vj | dist(vi →
vj ) ≤ d}.

    The definition of locality we use is built directly on the notion of the incoming and outgoing
sets. Informally, the system is d-localizable if every subsystem in the network can synthesize a
controller using a plant model which is limited to subsystems contained in its d-outgoing set and
implemented using signals coming only from subsystems in its d-incoming set. Note that we choose
d to be significantly smaller than the longest path in G.

Definition 2. Given the state dynamics (4.2) and the map x = Φx w. Denote the transfer matrix
describing the perturbation from signal wj at subsystem j to the state of subsystem i, xi , by [Φx ]ij .
Then the map Φx is d-localizable if and only if for every subsystem j, [Φx ]ij = 0 for all i ∈
                                                                                             / outj (d).
The definition for d-localizability of Φu where u = Φu w, follows in the same manner but with
perturbations to control action ui at subsystem i.

Definition 3. The subspace Ld is said to be a d-localized constraint if it constrains Φx to be
d-localized and Φu to be (d + 1)-localized.

   We now introduce temporal-locality: The set FT is a convex System Level Constraint (SLC)
that ensures the system response {Φx , Φu } has a finite impulse response of horizon length T .

                                                  21
Consider a transfer matrix G, then:
                                                             T
                                        (                                  )
                                                             X 1
                                FT :=    G ∈ RH∞ | G =                  G[i] ,
                                                                   zi
                                                             i=0

We make an important observation regarding computation here. When the SLC set S intersects
FT , the resulting SLS problem (4.12) becomes finite-dimensional. We now have all the ingredients
necessary to define a broad class of locality constraints.

Definition 4. The system given by the state equations (4.2) is (d, T )-localizable if (4.12) is feasible
with S = Ld ∩ FT for some (d, T ) ∈ Z+ × Z+ .

     The final class we consider describe delay constraints. We allow for three types of delays in
the network; actuation delay, communication delay, and sensing delay denoted by ka , kc , and ks
respectively. Actuation delay describes the time taken for control action ui to affect state xi of
it’s subsystem. Communication delay is the amount of time it takes for a subsystem-controller to
transmit a signal to its immediate neighbors. Finally, the sensing delay is the time taken for a
subsystem-controller ui to access its state variable xi . For brevity it is assumed that (ka , kc , ks ) are
integers and normalized with respect to the sampling period of the system.
     We are now in position where we can combine the (d, T )-localization subspace constraint and
the communication subspace constraints as constraints on the system response {Φx , Φu }. The most
transparent way to implement these constraints is to enforceP∞ sparsity     constraints on
                                                                                         P∞the entries of
the system response spectral factors. Recall that Φx = k=0 z Φx [k] and Φu = k=0 z −k Φu [k],
                                                                   −k

then the combined (d, T )-localization and communication subspace constraints can be encoded by
specifying the support of the spectral factors. Define α = b k−kkac−ks c, then we have

                       supp(Φx [k]) ⊆ supp (A + I)min(d,α)
                                                              

                                                                         for k = 1 . . . T
                                              (A + I)min(d+1,α)
                                                                   
                       supp(Φu [k]) ⊆ supp

and Φx [k] = 0, Φu [k] = 0 for all k > T . The reader is referred to [61] for a detailed description of
the derivation of α and for some explicit cases where combinations of d and the delay parameters
are guaranteed to lead to feasible solutions. The delay constraints which are encoded as sparsity
constraints on the spectral factors are convex constraints. For notational convenience we will use
the set D to denote these sparsity constraints. Thus a (d, T )-locality constraint with delays is given
by S = Ld ∩ FT ∩ D.

4.3    Scalability via Decomposition
We now introduce the concept of column-separability for cost functionals and constraints. It is this
column-wise separability that will allow us to achieve O(1) synthesis complexity with respect to
the state dimension of (4.2).
                                                                                                     T
    For compactness of notation, in this section we define the transfer matrix Φ = ΦTx ΦTu
                                                                                             
                                                                                                        and
assume it dimension nr × nc . Let {c1 , . . . , cp } partition the set {1, . . . , nc }. Let us partition Φ
as {Φ(:, c1 ) . . . , Φ(:, cp )}. This idea of partitioning a decision variable by its columns leads to the
notion of column-wise separability:


                                                    22
Definition 5. The functional g(Φ) is column-wise separable with respect to the partition c1 , . . . , cp
if it can be written as
                                           Xp
                                    g(Φ) =     gj (Φ(:, cj ))
                                                     j=1

for some functionals gj for j = 1, . . . , p.

   Some examples of column-wise separable norms are described below. We note that the H∞ -
norm is not column- (nor row-) wise separable.

Example 2 (Frobenius norm). The square of the Frobenius norm of a m × n matrix Φ is given by
                                                           n
                                                         m X
                                                         X
                                            kΦk2F =                   Φ2ij .
                                                         i=1 j=1

This objective function is column-wise separable with respect to arbitrary column-wise partition.
Consider the explicit example of                      
                                              1 2 3
                                        Φ=
                                              4 5 6
partitioned as {1, 3}, {2}, then
                                                           2                     2
                                                    1 3                        2
                                   kΦk2F =                          +                    .
                                                    4 6         F
                                                                               5     F

Example 3 (H2 norm). The square of the H2 norm of a transfer matrix Φ is given by
                                                          ∞
                                                          X
                                           kΦk2H2 =             kΦ[t]k2F ,                       (4.14)
                                                          t=0

which is column-wise separable with respect to arbitrary column-wise partition. Now consider the
H2 -norm of a transfer matrix realization of a system with a finite impulse response of horizon T ,
i.e. Φ ∈ FT . In this case the summation in (4.14) is finite.

Example 4 (Element-wise `1 ). Motivated by the separability of the H2 norm, we define the element-
wise `1 norm (denoted by E1 ) of a transfer matrix Φ ∈ FT as
                                                      T
                                                    XXX
                                       ||Φ||E1 =                        |Φij [t]|.
                                                     i     j    t=0

Definition 6. The constraint-set S in (4.12) is column-wise separable with respect to the partition
c1 , . . . , cp when the condition

                                 Φ ∈ S ⇔ Φ(:, cj ) ∈ Sj for j = 1, . . . , p

is satisfied for some sets Sj for j = 1, . . . , p, where Sj = L(:, cj ) ∩ Xj ∩ FT .




                                                         23
Example 5 (Affine Subspace). The affine subspace constraint
                                                GΦ = H
is column-wise separable with respect to arbitrary column-wise partition. Specifically, we have
                                         GΦ(:, cj ) = H(:, cj )
for cj any subset of {1, . . . , n}. An important special case of column-wise separable affine subspace
constraints is the system level parametrization constraint (4.12), here we have
                                                               
                                                          Φx
                         G = zI − A −B2 , Φ =                     , and H = I.
                                                            Φu
Example 6 (Locality and FIR Constraints). The locality and FIR constraints introduced in Section
4.2
                                        Φ ∈ L ∩ FT
are column-wise separable with respect to arbitrary column-wise partition. This follows from the
fact that both locality and FIR constraints can be encoded via sparsity structure: the resulting linear
subspace constraint is trivially column-wise separable.
   With the definition of column-wise separability firmly established the following chain of prob-
lems will make clear how functions and constraint sets that satisfy these definitions provide com-
putational tractability to large-scale problems. First, consider the generic optimization problem


                                          minimize            g(Φ)                             (4.15a)
                                               Φ
                                         subject to           Φ ∈ S,                           (4.15b)
where the decision variable is Φ, an m × n transfer matrix, g(·) a functional objective, and S a set
constraint. Assume now that the objective function (4.15a) and the set constraint (4.15b) are both
column-wise separable with respect to a column-wise partition {c1 , . . . , cp }. When the objective
function and constraints are both column-wise separable we are said to have a column-wise separable
problem. Specifically, (4.15) can be partitioned into p parallel subproblems as
                                       minimize          gj (Φ(:, cj ))                        (4.16a)
                                         Φ(:,cj )

                                      subject to         Φ(:, cj ) ∈ Sj                        (4.16b)
for j = 1, . . . , p. We will now show that System Level Synthesis problems of the form (4.12) under
separability conditions can be written in the form of (4.16) and explicitly form the problem. First,
let us define                                               
                                         ZAB = zI − A −B2 ,
set Φ as defined in example 5, and let the the system level constraint be given by S = L ∩ FT ∩ X .
The state-feedback SLS problem (4.12) can then be written as
                                                min g(Φ)                                       (4.17a)
                                                    Φ
                                        subject to ZAB = I                                     (4.17b)
                                                             Φ ∈ S.                            (4.17c)


                                                        24
As we have already shown, the affine subspace constraint (4.17b) is column-wise separable with
respect to any column partitioning. If g(·) is chosen to be column-wise separable, for example it is
given by the H2 − or E1 -norms, then (4.17) is a column-wise separable optimization problem if the
SLC (4.17c) is column-wise separable. Given that we have shown FT ∩ L to be separable, all that
is needed is for S to be column-wise separable is for X to also be separable. When this is true,
we can express the set constraint Sj in (4.16b) as Sj = L(:, cj ) ∩ FT ∩ Xj for some Xj for each j.
Finally, using the column partitions, (4.17) can be partitioned into p parallel subproblems of the
form

                               minimize     gj (Φ(:, cj ))                                      (4.18a)
                                 Φ(:,cj )

                              subject to    ZAB Φ(:, cj ) = I(:, cj )                           (4.18b)
                                            Φ(:, cj ) ∈ L(:, cj ) ∩ FT ∩ Xj                     (4.18c)

for j = 1, . . . , p. The column-wise separable SLS problem (4.18) is exactly in the form of the generic
column-wise separable optimization problem (4.16).
    Observe that the p sub-problems are completely decoupled and can be solved in parallel, more-
over, because of the constraint L the dimension of each the sub-problem will be smaller than that
of the global problem (4.12) – this is because the decomposed constraint L(:, cj ) has sparse support
and can be permuted into partition of zero and non-zero elements, the zero elements can then be
dropped. Effectively, this means that each sub-problem only has to work with a local system model.
Subsystem i comprising (Aii , Aij , Bii ) is a constructed from suitably defined sub-blocks of (A, B2 )
as defined in (4.2).
    The following simplified example should provide some additional intuition into the role of spatio-
temporal locality.

Example 7 (Symmetric Chain). Consider the network dynamical system with the dynamics at
node i given by
                                            X
                  xi [t + 1] = Aii xi [t] +   Aij xj [t] + Bii ui [t] + δxi [t].
                                               j∈Ni

The set Ni denotes the incoming set of node i, in this case the system graph is a bi-directional chain,
i.e. the adjacency matrix has zeros everywhere apart from at the sub- and super-diagonal entries.
Furthermore, we assume that the control inputs and disturbances only directly affect local subsys-
tems. In Figure 3 a diagram of the system response to a particular disturbance (δx )i is depicted.
The horizontal-axis denotes time and the vertical-axis indicates position in the chain. At time t
an impulse hits node i (chosen as the center of the chain). The figure shows the communication
delay imposed on the controller via the QI subspace SLC, the deadbeat response of the system to
the disturbance imposed by the FIR SLC, and the localized region affected by the disturbance (δx )i
imposed by the localized SLC.

4.3.1   Dimension Reduction
In the previous section, the idea of column-wise separability for functions and constraints was
introduced. It was shown that SLS problems (4.12) defined by column-wise separable components
could be easily solved by a set of parallel sub-problems as described by (4.18). In this subsection,


                                                   25
                                   Communication delay
                    Space
                                                                             Locality
                        xi+1                                                 Constraint
                         xi
                                     xi
                                              Affected Region
                        xi 1



                                                     T       FIR
                                          t t+1                              Time

            Figure 3: The state response to a disturbance hitting the chain at time t.


we take advantage of the fact that locality constraints L(:, cj ) and network structure likely enforce
a sparsity pattern on the data and decision variables. Such sparsity leads to many of the entries
in the columns of Φ(:, cj ) being constrained to be zero, thus many of the elements of ZAB are not
needed - we now proceed to demonstrate how this can capitalized on.
    Let sj and tj be sets of positive integers, and assume that we have a column-wise separable SLS
problem (4.18) with column partitions {c1 , . . . , cp }. Later in the section we will describe how to
construct the sets sj and tj , for now we focus on the intuition behind the algorithm. It can be taken
for granted that the cardinality of the set sj is less than the number of rows in Φ(:, cj ). Likewise,
the cardinality of tj will be less than the number of rows in ZAB . Consider the j th subproblem
from (4.18), it will be shown that it is equivalent to the following optimization problem:

                               minimize      ḡj (Φ(sj , cj ))                                 (4.19a)
                                Φ(sj ,cj )

                            subject to       ZAB (tj , sj )Φ(sj , cj ) = I(tj , cj )           (4.19b)
                                             Φ(sj , cj ) ∈ L(sj , cj ) ∩ FT ∩ X̄j ,            (4.19c)

where Φ(sj , cj ) corresponds to a sub-matrix of Φ composed of the rows and columns of Φ specified
by the sets sj and cj respectively. The cost functional ḡj is simply the functional gj restricted to
the reduced set of variables, likewise X̄j is simply Xj restricted to the appropriate subset. Roughly
speaking, the set sj is the collection of optimization variables contained within the localized region
specified by L(:, cj ), and the set tj is the collection of states that are directly affected by the
optimization variables in sj .
     The computational complexity of solving (4.19) depends on the choice of cost functional g (and
hence ḡj ) and the number of variables in the problem. It should be clear by looking at (4.19)
that the cardinality of the sets cj , sj , tj determine the computational complexity of the resulting
reduced-order SLP. For example, the cardinality of the set sj is equal to the number of nonzero
rows of the locality constraint L(:, cj ). The sparsity of the system matrices is also central to the
cardinality of theses sets. When the locality constraint and the system matrices are suitably sparse,
it is possible to make the size of these sets much smaller than the size of the global network. In this

                                                       26
case, the global optimization subproblem (4.18) reduces to a local optimization subproblem (4.19)
which depends only on the local plant model ZAB (tj , sj ).
   Combining column-wise separability with the dimension-reduction procedure described above,
we have the following algorithm:

Input: g(·), S, and ZAB

  1. Find the column-wise partitioning {c1 , . . . , cp } such that (4.17) decomposes into (4.18).

  2. For j = 1, . . . , p
      Construct the sets sj , tj such that (4.18) reduces to (4.19).
      Solve (4.19).

      Output: Φ
      End For

  3. From sub-solutions Φ(sj , cj ) with j = 1, . . . , p, construct Φ.

    The above algorithm embodies the idea of locality. Not only does locality allow for decoupling
of the system level synthesis problem, it also provides a natural set of reduced order models where
each variable in the smaller problem corresponds to a “local” patch of the system model. The
reader is referred to [55] for the details of how to construct minimal sets sj and tj .

4.4   Localized LQR Optimal Control
Here we provide an example of a classical distributed control problem, namely that of distributed
H2 , or LQR, optimal control, that can be made scalable by imposing locality constraints on the
system responses {Φx , Φu }, and exploiting the separability of the resulting optimization problem.
We call the resulting optimization problem the Localized LQR (LLQR) problem.
    In [44], we formulate the LLQR problem with uncorrelated process noise (i.e., B1 = I) as
                                                       
                                                     Φx 2
                                minimize || C1 D12           ||                              (4.20a)
                                 {Φx ,Φu }              Φu H2
                                                            
                                                         Φx
                               subject to   zI − A −B2            =I                        (4.20b)
                                                            Φu
                                            
                                             Φx               1
                                                 ∈ L ∩ FT ∩ RH∞ .                            (4.20c)
                                             Φu               z

The (system level objective) SLO (4.20a) and the SLC (4.20c) are both column-wise separable with
respect to arbitrary column-wise partitions. The separable property of the SLO is implied by the
separability of the H2 norm and the assumption that the process noise is pairwise uncorrelated.
The separability of the constraints (4.20b) - (4.20c) follows from the above discussion pertaining to
affine subspaces. The physical interpretation of the column-wise separable property is that we can
analyze the system response of each local process disturbance δxj in an independent and parallel
way, and then exploit the superposition principle satisfied by LTI systems to reconstruct the full
solution to the LLQR problem. We also note that removing the locality and FIR constraints does


                                                   27
not affect column-wise separability, and hence the standard LQR problem with uncorrelated noise
is also column-wise separable.
    In general, imposing FIR or locality constraints degrades the transient performance of the
controller, so our controller is not H2 optimal. However, we will see in the next section via a
numerical example that by choosing appropriate (d, T ) parameters, the difference becomes negligi-
ble. In Section 4.5.3 we will derive bounds on the gap between the optimal solution and an FIR
approximation.

4.4.1   Performance Comparison
In this section, we synthesize our LLQR optimal controller for a specific plant, and compare the
performance with different classes of H2 optimal controllers from [36]. In particular, we consider
the centralized, delayed centralized, and optimal distributed (with quadratically invariant (QI)
information sharing constraints) H2 controllers.
    The plant model is given by (A, B), where A is a tridiagonal matrix with dimension 59 given
by
                                                            
                                        1    0.2 · · ·    0
                                                          .. 
                                     −0.2 . . .    ..
                                     
                                                       .   . 
                                A=   ..    ..     ..
                                                             .
                                                 .     . 0.2
                                                             
                                      .
                                        0    · · · −0.2 1

The instability of the plant is quantified by the spectral radius of A, which is ρ(A) = 1.0768 > 1.
B is a 59 × 20 matrix with the (6n + 1, 2n + 1)-th and (6n + 2, 2n + 2)-th entries being 1 and zero
elsewhere, n = 0, . . . , 9. Even though our method can be applied to an arbitrary plant topology,
we use this simple plant model as it leads to easily visualized representations of the aforementioned
space-time regions.
    For the localized controller, we choose (d, T ) = (9, 29). For all controllers with communication
delay constraints, we assume that the communication network has the same topology as the physical
network, but the speed is tc = 1.5 times faster than the speed at which dynamics propagate through
the plant. For our localized distributed controllers, we have
                                      T
                                      [ 1             
                                                          min(d,btc (t−1)c)
                                                                            
                   supp (Φx [t]) =             t
                                                 supp   A
                                           z
                                     t=1
                                      T
                                     [     1        
                                                      >
                                                             
                                                                 min(d+1,btc (t−2)c)
                                                                                     
                   supp (Φu [t]) =            supp  B   supp   A                              (4.21)
                                           zt
                                     t=2

for each value of t up to T . The union operation for binary matrices is taken as the element-wise
OR operation. We then solve (4.20) with C1 and D12 set to identity.
    We illustrate the difference between the different control schemes by plotting the space-time
evolution of a single disturbance hitting the middle state. A concrete realization of a localized
forward space-time region is in Figures 4(h) and 4(i): the effect of the disturbance is limited in
both state and control action in time and space.
    Next, we calculate the optimal value for each controller and summarize the results in Table
3. The objective is normalized with respect to that of the centralized H2 controller. Clearly, our

                                                       28
                                                                                0
                                              10
                                              20
                                              30                                −5
                                              40
                                              50
                                                                                −10
                                                   50       100 150 200 250

                                               (a) State for Open loop

                                                        0                                         0
                          10                                        10
                          20                                        20
                          30                            −5          30                            −5
                          40                                        40
                          50                                        50
                                                        −10                                       −10
                                 50   100 150 200 250                      50   100 150 200 250

                               (b) State for Ideal H2                (c) Control for Ideal H2

                                                        0                                         0
                          10                                        10
                          20                                        20
                          30                            −5          30                            −5
                          40                                        40
                          50                                        50
                                                        −10                                       −10
                                 50   100 150 200 250                      50   100 150 200 250

                           (d) State for Delayed H2                 (e) Control for Delayed H2

                                                        0                                         0
                          10                                        10
                          20                                        20
                          30                            −5          30                            −5
                          40                                        40
                          50                                        50
                                                        −10                                       −10
                                 50   100 150 200 250                      50   100 150 200 250

                           (f) State for Distributed                (g) Control         for       Dis-
                                                                    tributed
                                                        0                                         0
                          10                                        10
                          20                                        20
                          30                            −5          30                            −5
                          40                                        40
                          50                                        50
                                                        −10                                       −10
                                 50   100 150 200 250                      50   100 150 200 250

                               (h) State for LLQR                        (i) Control for LLQR

Figure 4: The log absolute value of state and control for a given disturbance at time t = 50. The
horizontal axis represents time and the vertical axis represents state in space. The legend on the
right shows the meaning of the colors.


localized control scheme can achieve similar performance to that of the centralized one. Numerical
evidence seems to suggest that this property holds for most plants that are localizable. For an ideal
H2 controller, the closed loop response decays exponentially in both time and space, as indicated
by Figures 4(b) and 4(c). Therefore, it is generally possible to find a favorable (d, T ) to synthesize
the localized controller such that the closed loop transient response does not degrade much – this
is akin to the insight in [27] used to localize the implementation of funnel-causal systems.


                                                               29
   In summary, our result demonstrates that the LLQR optimal controller can be synthesized
and implemented in a localized manner, but can achieve transient response close to that of an
unconstrained optimal controller.

                     Table 1: Comparison between Different Control Schemes

                                     Ideal H2   Delayed     Distributed     LLQR
                    Comm Speed       Inf        1.5         1.5             1.5
                    Control Time     Inf        Inf         Inf             29
                    Locality         Max(58)    Max(58)     Max(58)         9
                    Objective        1          126.7882    1.1061          1.1142



                            104


                            103


                            102


                            101


                                                              Localized
                            100
                                                              Centralized
                                                              Distributed
                            10-1
                                   102             103             104


Figure 5: The horizontal axis denotes the number of states of the system, and the vertical axis is
the computation time in seconds. The FIR horizon length is T = 7.

    Figure 5 clearly shows the computation time needed for the distributed controller grows rapidly
when the size of problem increases. The gradient of the curve corresponding to the localized
controller is about 1.4 which is slightly larger than the theoretical value of 1. This issue is likely
due to memory management issues and not related to the fundamental optimization problems. We
further note that each of the distributed problems were solved in series on a single laptop, the
performance would be significantly improved with a true parallel implementation.

4.5   Robustness
The previous sections highlighted the benefits of spatiotemporal locality: imposing FIR constraints
trivially lead to finite-dimensional optimization problems (and simple filter-bank based controller
implementations), and spatial locality leads to huge wins in terms of controller synthesis and
implementation complexity. However, both of these constraints can often be fairly restrictive in
practice: indeed, if a system is stabilizable, but not controllable, we do not expect any such
constraints to hold exactly. This section extends the robustness results presented in Section 2.3


                                                 30
to the infinite horizon setting, allowing us to circumvent these issues. Further, we show that this
allows us to formalize the folk theorem that “good controllers are easy to compute.”

4.5.1   A robustness result
We begin with the infinite horizon analogue of the robustness result presented in Section 2.3 that
provides necessary and sufficient conditions under which a controller implemented using transfer
matrices that only approximately satisfy the achievability constraint (4.5) is stabilizing. We then
leverage this result and the use of “virtual” actuation and communication resources at design time
to define a principled approach to approximate controller synthesis.
Theorem 4.3. Let (Φ̂x , Φ̂u , ∆) be a solution to
                                        
                                      Φ̂x                                1
                      zI − A −B2              = I + ∆,       Φ̂x , Φ̂u ∈     RH∞ .            (4.22)
                                         Φ̂u                               z
   Then, the controller implementation

                                         δ̂x = x − x̂                                        (4.23a)
                                          u = z Φ̂u δ̂x                                      (4.23b)
                                          x̂ = (z Φ̂x − I)δ̂x .                              (4.23c)

internally stabilizes the system (A, B2 ) if and only if (I + ∆)−1 is stable. Furthermore, the actual
system responses achieved are given by
                                         
                                       x       Φ̂x
                                            =      (I + ∆)−1 δx .                              (4.24)
                                       u       Φ̂u


Proof. For a state-feedback system (4.2) with controller implementation (4.23) using transfer
matrices {Φ̂x , Φ̂u }, the following holds

                                     (zI − A)x = B2 u + δx                                   (4.25a)
                                              u = z Φ̂u δ̂x + δu                             (4.25b)
                                              x = z Φ̂x δ̂x − δy .,                          (4.25c)

where δy and δu are respectively perturbations on the measurement and control action (as illus-
trated in Figure 2) introduced to verify the internal stability of the resulting closed loop system.
    Substituting (4.25b) and (4.25c) into (4.25a), we have

                     z(zI − A)Φ̂x δ̂x − (zI − A)δy = zB2 Φ̂u δˆx + B2 δu + δx .

Moving δˆx to the left-hand-side and using relation (4.22), we have

                              z(I + ∆)δ̂x = (zI − A)δy + B2 δu + δx ,

Let I∆ := (I + ∆)−1 . We then have that the closed loop transfer matrices from (δx , δy , δu ) to δ̂x
are given by
                               1                 1         1
                          δ̂x = I∆ δx + I∆ (I − A)δy + I∆ B2 δu .                             (4.26)
                               z                 z         z

                                                  31
Substituting (4.26) into (4.25b) and (4.25c), we have the closed loop transfer matrices from (δx , δy ,
δu ) to (x, u, δ̂x ) summarized in Table 2. Clearly, if I∆ is stable, then all the transfer matrices in
Table 2 are stable. If I∆ is unstable, then the closed loop maps from δx to δ̂x will be unstable, and
the controller does not internally stabilize the system. Therefore, the stability of I∆ = (I + ∆)−1
is necessary and sufficient condition for the controller implementation (4.23) to internally stabilize
the system (A, B2 ). Finally, Table 2 shows that the actual response achieved from δx → (x, u) is
given by (4.24).


                        Table 2: Closed Loop Maps With Non-localizability


                                   δx              δy                  δu

                            x    Φ̂x I∆   Φ̂x I∆ (zI − A) − I       Φ̂x I∆ B2

                            u    Φ̂u I∆     Φ̂u I∆ (zI − A)       I + Φ̂u I∆ B2

                                  1
                           δ̂x    z I∆        I∆ (I − z1 A)          1
                                                                     z I∆ B2



    Theorem 4.3 can now be combined with small gain theorems to provide simple sufficient condi-
tions for robust stability.

Corollary 4.4 (Sufficient conditions for robustness). Under the conditions of Theorem 4.3, the
closed loop system is stable if max{k∆kH∞ , k∆kL1 , k∆> kL1 } < 1.

   It therefore follows that if a set of transfer matrices {Φ̂x , Φ̂u , ∆} satisfy the following constraints:
                                 
                                Φ̂x
                                     = I + ∆, Φ̂x , Φ̂u ∈ z1 RH∞ , k∆k• < 1,
                   
                    zI − A −B2                                                                        (4.27)
                                 Φ̂u

for • ∈ {H∞ , L1 , E1 }, then a controller (4.23) implemented using the transfer matrices {Φ̂x , Φ̂u } is
globally stabilizing for the system dynamics (4.2).
    From Theorem 4.3, we see that the actual closed loop map from the disturbance δ x to state x
and control action u achieved by a controller implemented using the approximate system responses
{Φ̂x , Φ̂u } is given by
                                           
                                         x      Φ̂x
                                             =       (I + ∆)−1 δ x .                              (4.28)
                                         u      Φ̂u
    Integrating the approximate achievability constraint (4.22), the sufficient conditions for stabil-
ity imposed in by Corollary 4.4, and the system responses that they achieve (4.28) into a SLS
optimization problem, we obtain the following:




                                                    32
                                                        
                                                       Φ̂x
                                                             (I + ∆)−1 B1
                                         
                           minimize        C1 D12
                           Φ̂x ,Φ̂u ,∆                  Φ̂u
                                                            
                                                         Φ̂x
                                   s.t. zI − A −B2               =I +∆
                                                            Φ̂u                              (4.29)
                                         
                                          Φ̂x
                                                ∈ S, k∆k < 1
                                          Φ̂u
                                        Φ̂x , Φ̂u ∈ z1 RH∞ .
    Optimization problem (4.29) is non-convex: however, if the norm chosen in the objective func-
tion is sub-multiplicative, we can upper bound the objective function by
                                      kB1 k
                                                        
                                                      Φ̂x
                                              C1 D12           ,                           (4.30)
                                    1 − k∆k             Φ̂u
where we have used the sub-multiplicative  property, that k∆k < 1 and the power-series expansion of
the the inverse (I +∆)−1 = ∞        k
                            P
                              k=0 ∆   . As the next lemma shows, this bound is indeed quasi-convex
and hence can be effectively optimized.
Lemma 4.5. For a convex function f : D → R, a non-negative convex function g : D → R+ , both
defined on some domain D, and a convex set C ⊆ D, it holds that

                                f (x)           1
                         min             = min 1−γ min{f (x) | g(x) ≤ γ}                     (4.31)
                         x∈C 1 − g(x)        γ∈[0,1)         x∈C

Proof.(Sketch) As g(x) is non-negative, we can write
                                f (x)                  f (x)
                          min            = min                    s.t. g(x) ≤ γ
                          x∈C 1 − g(x)       γ,x∈C 1 − γ
                                                1
                                         = min 1−γ min{f (x) | g(x) ≤ γ},
                                               γ            x∈C

which proves the result. Finally, it is easily verified that the above problem is quasi-convex, and
hence uni-modal in γ.
    Thus applying the bound (4.30) and Lemma 4.5, we can compute an upper bound to optimiza-
tion problem (4.29) by solving the following quasi-convex problem:
                                                                 
                                 1
                                                               Φ̂x
                     minγ∈[0,1) 1−γ minimize        C1 D12
                                    Φ̂x ,Φ̂u ,∆                  Φ̂u
                                                                     
                                                                  Φ̂x
                                            s.t. zI − A −B2              =I +∆
                                                                     Φ̂u              (4.32)
                                                  
                                                   Φ̂x
                                                         ∈ S, k∆k ≤ γ
                                                   Φ̂u
                                                 Φ̂x , Φ̂u ∈ z1 RH∞ .
   We now give two examples of how this robustness result can be used. The first is an infinite
horizon analogue to the modeling error result presented in Section 2.3, and the second shows
how spatiotemporal approximations to the infinite horizon SLS problem can be taken and still
achieve provably near optimal performance while still benefiting from the favorable computational
properties of localized synthesis.

                                                       33
4.5.2   Robust control with sub-optimality guarantees
                                                  b B)
We return to the problem setting where estimates (A, b of a true system (A, B) satisfy

                                    k∆A k2→2 ≤ A , k∆B k2→2 ≤ B

with ∆A := A b − A and ∆B := B b − B and where we wish to minimize the worst-case LQR cost over
the parametric uncertainty.
   Leveraging the results of the previous section, and following a similar argument as that in
Section 2.3, we can cast a robust LQR problem as follows

                                              " 1        #
                                                          
                               1               Q2   0 Φ̂x
             minimizeγ∈[0,1)        min              1
                             1 − γ Φ̂x ,Φ̂u    0    R2Φ̂u
                                                             H2
                                                   i Φ̂         √
                                                                            
                                        h
                                                        x              A Φ̂x                     (4.33)
                                    s.t. zI − A −B
                                              b  b          = I,   2                    ≤γ
                                                      Φ̂u              B Φ̂u H
                                                                                    ∞
                                                    1
                                         Φ̂x , Φ̂u ∈ RH∞ .
                                                    z

We note that this optimization objective is jointly quasi-convex in (γ, Φ̂x , Φ̂u ). Hence, as a function
of γ alone the objective is quasi-convex, and furthermore is smooth in the feasible domain. There-
fore, the outer optimization with respect to γ can effectively be solved with methods like golden
section search. We remark that the inner optimization is a convex problem, though an infinite
dimensional one, but as we show in the next subsection, a simple finite dimensional approximation
to this problem leads to nearly equivalent performance.
     We further remark that because γ ∈ [0, 1), any feasible solution (Φ̂x , Φ̂u ) to optimization
problem (4.33) generates a controller K    b = Φ̂u Φ̂−1 satisfying the conditions of Corollary 4.4, and
                                                     x
hence stabilizes the true system (A, B). Therefore, even if the solution is approximated, as long as
it is feasible, it will be stabilizing. We show now that for sufficiently small estimation error bounds
A and B , we can further bound the sub-optimality of the performance achieved by our robustly
stabilizing controller relative to that achieved by the optimal LQR controller K? .

Theorem 4.6 (Theorem 4.1, [19]). Let J? denote the minimal LQR cost achievable by any controller
for the dynamical system with transition matrices (A, B), J(A, B, K) be the cost achieved by any
controller K on the system defined by transition matrices (A, B), and let K? denote the optimal
contoller. Let (A, b be estimates of the transition matrices such that k∆A k2→2 ≤ A , k∆B k2→2 ≤
                b B)
B . Then, if K = Φ̂u Φ̂−1
              b
                        x is synthesized via (4.33) the relative error in the LQR cost is

                        b − J?
                J(A, B, K)
                               ≤ 5(A + B kK? k2→2 ) (zI − (A + BK? ))−1 H∞ ,                    (4.34)
                      J?

as long as (A + B kK? k2→2 )k(zI − (A + BK? ))−1 kH∞ ≤ 1/5.

    This result offers a guarantee on the performance of the SLS synthesized controller as a function
of the uncertainty in our model parameters – as far as we are aware, this is the first such result
that provides a quantitative measure of performance degradation incurred by a robust controller
as a function system uncertainty size. We refer the reader to [19] for the proof this result, but

                                                    34
remark here that Theorem 4.6 allows one to transparently connect statistical estimation results
(which provide non-asymptotic guarantees on the size of the estimation errors A and B ) with
robust control, allowing for end-to-end sample complexity bounds to be obtained. In this sense,
the robust version of SLS provides a bridge between machine learning and robust control.

4.5.3    Spatiotemporal approximations
We begin with the simpler setting of considering only an FIR approximation. In particular, consider
the general SLS optimization problem (4.12), where for simplicity, we assume that there are no
additional constraints S, resulting in a convex but infinite-horizon optimal control problem. For
concreteness, we will consider the following mixed H2 /H∞ optimal control problem – these methods
extend to the more general setting in a natural way:
                                                           "             # 
                                1/2                       1/2
                                Q             Φx             Q∞            Φx
                 minΦx ,Φu                            +λ
                                        R1/2 Φu H                  R∞
                                                                     1/2   Φu
                                               2                             H∞
                                            Φx                                             (4.35)
                subject to zI − A −B2              =I
                                              Φu
                                         1
                             Φx , Φu ∈ z RH∞ ,

where λ > 0 is a user-specified weighting parameter.
    Although there is no known exact solution to this problem, we show here that the robustness
results of the previous section can be used to formulate a finite-dimensional approximation to (4.35)
that has provably near optimal performance. In particular, we consider the following approximate
SLS problem:

                                                                    "             #             !
                                                                      1/2
                                       Q1/2
                                                                                    
                    1                                 Φx             Q∞            Φx
        minγ∈[0,1) 1−γ     min                          +λ
                          Φx ,Φu              R1/2    Φu       H2
                                                                            1/2
                                                                            R∞     Φu
                                                                                          H∞
                                                      Φx                                           (4.36)
                         subject to zI − A −B2 −I  Φu  = I
                                                          1
                                                         zT
                                                            V
                                    kV k2→2 ≤ γ, Φx , Φu ∈ FT .

    Before analyzing performance of the controller implemented using the solution to optimization
problem (4.36), let us highlight the changes that have been made. First, we have imposed that the
synthesized system responses {Φx , Φu } lie in FT , i.e., that they be FIR of horizon T . Although we
argued that this was a desirable constraint to impose, as it immediately yields a finite-dimensional
optimization problem, in practice, the system (A, B2 ) may not be controllable, meaning that such
constraints are infeasible for any value of T . Further, it is well known that imposing such FIR
constraints, resulting in deadbeat control, can lead to robustness issues in implementation.
    To circumvent these issues, we also introduce an additional term z T1−1 V to the achievability
constraint: this term can be thought of as the introduction of a centralized virtual actuator that
can only act at time T − 1. This virtual actuator ensures that the FIR constraint is in fact feasible
for any value of T ≥ 1 (simply set V = −AΦx [T − 1] − BΦu [T − 1]). However, as this virtual
actuator does not in fact exist, we must account for this in our analysis. To do so, notice that the



                                                          35
modified achievability constraint is equivalent to
                                                  
                                               Φx         1
                                  zI − A −B2         = I + T −1 V,
                                                  Φu      z

allowing us to leverage Theorem 4.3 and Corollaroy 4.4 with ∆ = z −(T −1) V . Following a similar
argument to that used above, so long as z −(T −1) V H∞ = kV k2→2 < 1 (which is enforced by the
constraints of the optimization problem), we can then upper bound the achieved objective function
by their robust counterparts, leading to the modified objective function.
    We now show that the performance of the controller synthesized using optimization problem
(4.36) converges exponentially quickly to that achieved by the optimal solution to the infinite
horizon problem (4.35) with respect to the approximation horizon T .
    In particular, let Φ?x and Φ?u denote the optimal solutionsP∞to −t problem (4.35), and let K? =
Φu (Φ?x )−1 be the resulting optimal controller. As Φ?x =
  ?
                                                                 t=1 z   Φx [t] ∈ z1 RH∞ , there exist
constants C? and ρ? such that kΦ?x [t]k2→2 ≤ C? ρt? for all t ≥ 0. We leverage this observation to
construct a feasible solution to (4.36) using Φ?x and Φ?u to obtain a sub-optimality bound in terms
of the horizon T .

Theorem 4.7. If the approximation horizon T is sufficiently large to ensure that C? ρT? < 1, then
the approximate SLS problem (4.36) is feasible, and achieves the relative performance bound:

                             1                  λC? ρT?              1/2          1/2
 JT (Φx , Φu , V, γ) ≤              J ? +                         (kQ∞   k2→2 + kR∞   k2→2 kK? kH∞ ). (4.37)
                         1 − C? ρT?       (1 − C? ρT? )(1 − ρT? )

Here JT (Φx , Φu , V, γ) is the performance achieved by the controller synthesized using the approxi-
mate SLS problem (4.36) with horizon T , and J? is the performance achieved by the optimal solution
to (4.35).

     Before presenting the proof of this result, we comment on its implications. First, we see very
clearly that the gap between JT and J? decays exponentially with the horizon T , and further, this
rate is specified by ρ? , which governs the spectral norm decay of true system response elements.
Informally, this theorem shows that if the optimal controller leads to good system performance
(i.e., to rapid decay of the system response elements), then it is easy to approximate.
Proof. Let (Φx , Φu , V, γ) denote the optimal solutions to the approximate SLS problem (4.36),
and denote by JT (Φx , Φu , V, γ) the value of the objective function over a finite horizon T .
     We now construct a feasible solution to to the problem using the optimal system responses Φ?x
and Φ?u . In particular, we claim that

                              Φ̃x := Φ?x (1 : T − 1)
                              Φ̃u := Φ?u (1 : T − 1)
                                Ṽ := −AΦ?x [T − 1] − BΦ?u [T − 1] = −Φ?x [T ]
                                γ̃ := C? ρT? ,

is a feasible solution. First, notice that for t = 0, ..., T − 2, the achievability constraint (4.5) is
equivalent to
                                    Φx [t + 1] = AΦx [t] + B2 Φu [t].


                                                       36
Since {Φ̃x , Φ̃u } are simply truncations of {Φ?x , Φ?u } to a horizon of T − 1, they satisfy these con-
straints by construction. Finally, for t = T − 1, we have that
                            Φx [T ] = AΦ?x [T − 1] + BΦ?u [T − 1] + Ṽ = 0,
where the final equality follows from our choice of Ṽ to effectively cancel out the tail of optimal
response. Finally, note that kṼ k2→2 = kΦ?x [T ]k2→2 ≤ C? ρT? < 1, where the final inequality follows
from our assumption on T .
    Therefore, by optimality, it follows that
     JT (Φx , Φu , V, γ) ≤ JT (Φ̃x , Φ̃u , Ṽ , γ̃)
                                                                    "           #     !
                                              1/2                  1/2
                                1               Q         Φ̃x         Q∞          Φ̃x
                         =                                       +λ                       .
                           1 − C? ρT?               R1/2 Φ̃u H              1/2
                                                                           R∞     Φ̃u
                                                               2                      H         ∞

Our final step is to relate the norms achieved by the FIR approximations Φ?x (0 : T − 1) and
Φ?u (0 : T − 1) to those achieved by Φ?x and Φ?u . We begin by noting that for any stable transfer
matrix M ∈ z −1 RH∞ , we have that kM(1 : T )kH2 ≤ kMkH2 , for any T ≥ 0. The H∞ case is
slightly more cumbersome, as such an inequality does not hold exactly, but notice that we can write
  "            #                       "            #            "              #
     1/2                                  1/2                           1/2
                  Φ?x (1 : T − 1)                      Φ?x                            Φ?x (T : ∞)
                                                                                                  
   Q∞                                    Q∞                           Q∞
                                      ≤                          +
           1/2
          R∞     Φ?u (1 : T − 1)                 1/2
                                                R∞     Φ?u                   R∞
                                                                               1/2    Φ?u (T : ∞),
                                    H
                                    ∞                        H    ∞                                  H     ∞

where the inequality follows from the triangle inequality. Finally, notice that last term can further
be be bounded as
      "            #
         1/2
                      Φ?x (T : ∞)
                                  
        Q∞                                    1/2           1/2
                                        ≤ (kQ∞    k2→2 + kR∞    k2→2 kK? kH∞ ) kΦ?x (T : ∞)kH∞
               1/2
              R∞      Φ?u (T : ∞),
                                     H∞
                                                                                 ∞
                                                                                 X
                                               1/2          1/2
                                          ≤ (kQ∞   k2→2 + kR∞   k2→2 kK? kH∞ )     kΦ?x (t)k2→2
                                                                                 t=T
                                                                                    ∞
                                                                                    X
                                               1/2          1/2
                                          ≤ (kQ∞   k2→2 + kR∞   k2→2 kK? kH∞ )C?          ρt?
                                                                                    t=T

                                               1/2          1/2                 C? ρT?
                                          = (kQ∞   k2→2 + kR∞   k2→2 kK? kH∞ )         .
                                                                               1 − ρT?
Combining this bound with the previous inequalities then yield the result.
    We conclude this section by remarking that the above proof contains a general recipe for gener-
ating such suboptimality bounds. Begin with the desired infinite horizon problem, and then write
out its FIR approximation by augmenting the system with virtual actuation, and then exploiting
the robustness results in Theorem 4.3 and Corollary 4.4. Then, construct a feasible solution to
the approximate problem using the optimal solution to the infinite horizon problem and follow the
general approach of the proof above to obtain a suboptimality bound by exploiting the exponential
decay of stable LTI systems. Finally, to extend these results from temporal (FIR) approximations
to spatiotemporal (localized) approximations, it suffices to impose a localized SLC on the system
responses, and further to assume that the optimal solutions also suitably decay in space accord-
ing to some function f (d)– the resulting sub-optimality bounds will be similar, but now decaying
exponentially as a function of the horizon T , and according to f (d) with respect to the localized
region diameter d.

                                                  37
4.5.4   Examples
Now that we have established a theoretical robustness result we shall use this subsection to illustrate
the effect of Theorem 4.3 when k∆k =  6 0. Consider the symmetric bi-directional chain topology,
where each node in the chain is a scalar LTI system evolving according to the dynamics

                      xi [t + 1] = α(xi [t] + κxi−1 [t] + κxi+1 [t]) + bi ui [t] + wi [t],

where α is chosen to make the open-loop system unstable with a spectral radius of 1.1. The
coupling strength κ is set to 1. The value bi is given by 1 if there is an actuator at subsystem i,
and 0 otherwise. We place 40 actuators in the network at locations specified by i = 5j − 4 and 5j
for j = 1, . . . , 20. The objective function is the quadratic term kxk22 + γkuk22 .
    We begin by showing the system response for a system with actuation at every other node. By
choosing (d, T )-locality constraints with d = 4, T = 15 and restricting the communication speed
to be equal to the speed at which the plant dynamics propagate, the system response cannot be
perfectly localized. However, by employing Theorem 4.3, the robust SLS problem finds a solution
such that k∆k < 1. The state and control action from the resulting controller are shown in Figure 6.


                                                       comm speed = 1, d = 4, T = 15
                                         log10 (|x|)                                             log10 (|u|)
                                                                       0                                                      0

                      5                                                -1     5                                               -1

                     10                                                -2    10                                               -2

                     15                                                -3    15                                               -3

                     20                                                -4    20                                               -4
                     25                                                -5    25                                               -5
                     30                                                -6    30                                               -6
                     35                                                -7    35                                               -7
                     40                                                -8
                                                                             40                                               -8
                     45                                                      45
                                                                       -9                                                     -9
                     50                                                      50
                                                                       -10                                                    -10
                          10   20   30    40      50    60   70   80              10   20   30    40      50   60   70   80
                                          Time                                                     Time                   1




Figure 6: With the dynamics propagating at the same speed as the controllers communicate and
with such sparse actuation, we are now unable to localize in space and time as desired. However,
the control action and state deviation is reasonably well contained.

   In subsequent experiments shown in Figures 7–9 the system responses are shown for systems
where we trade off the actuator density (Fig 7), d-hop locality (Figure 8), and FIR horizon length
(Figure 9). In each case we show a parameter value that results in a localizable system response
(shown on the left) and the virtually localizable response (shown on the right).

4.6     Summary
In this section, we extended the state-feedback finite-time horizon results from Section 2 to the
infinite horizon settings. We further showed that the SLS framework allows us to impose convex
locality constraints on distributed controllers, greatly improving the scalability of synthesis methods
via a decomposition and dimensionality reduction based method. We also showed how robust
counterparts to SLS problems can be used to transparently accommodate modeling errors, as well
as how they can be used to derive finite dimensional approximations to infinite horizon problems

                                                                           38
Figure 7: As the number of actuators available for control decreases it becomes more difficult to
obtain a localized response. The H2 -norm for the actuation = 0.5 is 79.5, and for actuation = 0.2
it is 97.52 with, k∆kE1 = 0.25.




Figure 8: The d-hop sparsity is decreased from d = 8 to d = 4. The closed loop H2 -norm is 72.57
and 72.59 for d = 8 and d = 4 respectively. No virtual localization was required.


with provable performance guarantees. In addition to the results presented here, there has also
been interesting work looking at linking the SLS state-feedback formulation to classical notions such
as passivity [62] and infinite-dimensional system theory and the spatial invariance framework [63].
In [64] the ∆-block is used to model discretization errors when a sparse approximate model is
constructed from a structured continuous-time dynamics.


5    Output Feedback
This section extends many of the ideas presented in the previous section to the output feedback
setting. As we will see, many of the core concepts developed in the state-feedback setting (working


                                                 39
Figure 9: The FIR Horizon length is decreased from T = 8 to T = 4. In neither case was virtual
actuation required. The H2 -norm was 72.57 for T = 8 and 72.96 for T = 4.

directly with system responses, affine achievability constraints) extend in a natural way to the
output feedback setting. However, these extensions often come at the expense of more complex
formulae and computational procedures.

5.1   Output Feedback with D22 = 0
We begin by extending Theorem 4.1 to the output feedback setting. Without loss of generality (see
later in the section), we consider a strictly proper plant described by
                                                             
                                               A B1 B2
                                      P =  C1 D11 D12  .                                  (5.1)
                                               C2 D21     0

    Letting δx [t] = B1 w[t] denote the disturbance on the state, and δy [t] = D21 w[t] denote the
disturbance on the measurement, the dynamics defined by plant (5.1) can be written as

                                x[t + 1] = Ax[t] + B2 u[t] + δx [t]
                                    y[t] = C2 x[t] + δy [t].                                  (5.2)

   Analogous to the state-feedback case, we define a system response {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy } from
perturbations (δx , δy ) to state and control inputs (x, u) via the following relation:
                                                        
                                        x      Φxx Φxy δx
                                           =                     .                            (5.3)
                                        u      Φux Φuy δy

    Substituting the output feedback control law u = Ky into the z-transform of system equation
(5.2), we obtain
                               (zI − A − B2 KC2 )x = δx + B2 Kδy .
For a proper controller K, the transfer matrix (zI − A − B2 KC2 ) is always invertible, hence we
obtain the following equivalent expressions for the system response (5.3) in terms of an output

                                                40
feedback controller K:

                                          Φxx = (zI − A − B2 KC2 )−1
                                          Φux = KC2 Φxx
                                          Φxy = Φxx B2 K
                                          Φuy = K + KC2 Φxx B2 K.                                              (5.4)

    We now present one of the main results of this section: an algebraic characterization of the
set {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy } of output-feedback system responses that are achievable by an internally
stabilizing controller K.




Figure 10: The proposed output feedback controller structure, with Φ̃xx = z(I − zΦxx ), Φ̃ux =
zΦux , and Φ̃xy = −zΦxy .


Theorem 5.1. For the output feedback system (5.1), the following are true:
(a) The affine subspace described by:
                                                                 
                                                      Φxx Φxy          
                                        zI − A −B2                  = I 0                                     (5.5a)
                                                          Φux Φuy
                                                                 
                                                Φxx Φxy zI − A          I
                                                                    =                                        (5.5b)
                                                Φux Φuy      −C2        0
                                                           1
                                        Φxx , Φux , Φxy ∈ RH∞ , Φuy ∈ RH∞                                     (5.5c)
                                                           z
    parameterizes all system responses (5.4) achievable by an internally stabilizing controller K.

(b) For any transfer matrices {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy } satisfying (5.5), the controller K = Φuy −
    Φux Φ−1                                           9
          xx Φxy achieves the desired response (5.4). Further, if the controller is implemented as
    in Fig. 10, then it is internally stabilizing.

    As in the state-feedback case, although not explicitly enforced, one cannot circumvent the need
for a stabilizable and detectable system, as formalized in the following lemma.
   9
     Note that for any transfer matrices {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy } satisfying (5.5), the transfer matrix Φxx is always
invertible because its leading spectral component z1 I is invertible. The same holds true for the transfer matrices
defined in equation (5.4).


                                                         41
Lemma 5.2. The triple (A, B2 , C2 ) is stabilizable and detectable if and only if the affine subspace
described by (5.5) is non-empty.
Proof. We begin by noting the analysis for the state feedback problem in Section 4 can be applied
to the state estimation problem by considering the dual to a full control system (c.f., §16.5 in [58]).
For instance, the following corollary to Lemma 4.2 gives an alternative definition of the detectability
of pair (A, C2 ) [48].
Corollary 5.3. The pair (A, C2 ) is detectable if and only if the following conditions are feasible:
                                                        
                                               zI − A
                                      Φxx Φxy              =I                                 (5.6a)
                                                   −C2
                                                1
                                   Φxx , Φxy ∈ RH∞ .                                          (5.6b)
                                                z
.
   Now assume the triple (A, B2 , C2 ) is stabilizable and detectable. As argued in Lemma 4.2 and
Corollary 5.3, this implies that there exist stable transfer matrices (Φ1xx , Φ1ux ) satisfying (4.5), and
stable transfer matrices (Φ2xx , Φ2xy ) satisfying (5.6). Using these transfer matrices, we construct the
stable transfer matrices, which can be verified to lie in the affine space (5.5)

                                Φxx = Φ1xx + Φ2xx − Φ1xx (zI − A)Φ2xx                              (5.7a)
                                Φux = Φ1ux − Φ1ux (zI − A)Φ2xx                                     (5.7b)
                                Φxy = Φ2xy − Φ1xx (zI − A)Φ2xy                                     (5.7c)
                                Φuy = −Φ1ux (zI − A)Φ2xy .                                         (5.7d)


    This lemma provides a sanity check, and in particular tells us that the set of achievable stable
system responses for the triple (A, B2 , C2 ) is non-empty if and only if the system is stabilizable and
detectable.
Proof.[Proof of Theorem 5.1]
    Proof of 1. Consider the output feedback system (5.1). Let {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy }, with x =
Φxx δx +Φxy δy and u = Φux δx +Φuy δy , be the system response achieved by an internally stabilizing
control law u = Ky. Then {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy } lies in the affine subspace described by (5.5).
    To see this, let the internally stabilizing controller K have state space realization (3.2). Com-
bining (3.2) with the system equation (5.2), we obtain the closed loop dynamics
                                                                    
                        zx       A + B2 Dk C2 B2 Ck x           I B2 Dk δx
                             =                               +                   .
                        zξ           B k C2        Ak     ξ     0    Bk      δy

From the assumption that K is internally stabilizing, we know that the state matrix of the above
equation is a stable matrix (Lemma 5.2 in [58]). The system response achieved by u = Ky is given
by                                                                     
                                      A + B2 Dk C2 B2 Ck I B2 Dk
                         Φxx Φxy           Bk C2        Ak    0   Bk 
                                   =                                   ,                  (5.8)
                         Φux Φuy              I          0    0    0 
                                            D k C2       Ck    0   Dk

                                                   42
               Table 3: Closed Loop Maps from Perturbations to Internal Variables


                        δx            δy              δu                    δβ

                                                                         1
                x       Φxx           Φxy          Φxx B2                z Φxy C2

                                                                         1
                u       Φux           Φuy        I + Φux B2              z Φuy C2

                                                                        1
                y     C2 Φxx      I + C2 Φxy      C2 Φxx B2             z C2 Φxy C2

                β   − z1 B2 Φux   − z1 B2 Φuy   − z1 B2 Φux B2   1      1
                                                                 z I − z 2 (A + B2 Φuy C2 )




which satisfies (5.5c). In addition, it can be shown by routine calculation that (5.8) satisfies both
(5.5a) and (5.5b).
    Proof of 2. Here we show that for any system response {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy } lying in the
affine subspace (5.5), we can construct an internally stabilizing controller K that leads to the
desired system response (5.4). From the relations in (5.4), we notice the identity K = Φuy −
KC2 Φxx B2 K = Φuy − Φux Φ−1      xx Φxy . This relation leads to the controller structure given in Figure
10, with Φ̃xx = z(I − zΦxx ), Φ̃ux = zΦux , and Φ̃xy = −zΦxy . As was the case for the state
feedback setting, it can be verified that all three of these transfer matrices lie in RH∞ . Therefore,
the structure given in Figure 10 is well defined. In addition, all of the blocks in Figure 10 are
stable filters – thus, as long as the origin (x, β) = (0, 0) is asymptotically stable, all signals internal
to the block diagram will decay to zero. To check the internal stability of the structure, we
introduce external perturbations δx , δy , δu , and δβ to the system. The perturbations appearing
on other links of the block diagram can all be expressed as a combination of the perturbations
(δx , δy , δu , δβ ) being acted upon by some stable transfer matrices, and so it suffices to check the
input-output stability of the closed loop transfer matrices from perturbations (δx , δy , δu , δβ ) to
controller signals (x, u, y, β) to determine the internal stability of the structure [58].
    For any system response {Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy } lying in the affine subspace defined by (5.5),
we construct a controller using the structure given in Figure 10. We now check the stability of
the closed loop transfer matrices from the perturbations (δx , δy , δu , δβ ) to the internal variables
(x, u, y, β). We have the following equations from Figure 10:

                                      zx = Ax + B2 u + δx
                                       y = C2 x + δy
                                     zβ = Φ̃xx β + Φ̃xy y + δβ
                                       u = Φ̃ux β + Φuy y + δu .

Combining these equations with the relations in (5.5a)–(5.5b), we summarize the closed loop trans-
fer matrices from (δx , δy , δu , δβ ) to (x, u, y, β) in Table 3.
    Equation (5.5c) implies that all sixteen transfer matrices in Table 3 are stable, so the imple-
mentation in Figure 10 is internally stable. Furthermore, the desired system response from (δx , δy )
to (x, u) is achieved.

                                                    43
   The controller implementation of Figure 10 is governed by the following equations:

                                        zβ = Φ̃xx β + Φ̃xy y
                                         u = Φ̃ux β + Φuy y,                                        (5.9)

which can be informally interpreted as an extension of the state-space realization (3.2) of a controller
K. In particular, the realization equations (5.9) can be viewed as a state-space like implementation
where the constant matrices AK , BK , CK , DK of the state-space realization (3.2) are replaced with
stable proper transfer matrices Φ̃xx , Φ̃ux , Φ̃xy , Φuy . The benefit of this implementation is that ar-
bitrary convex constraints imposed on the transfer matrices Φ̃xx , Φ̃ux , Φ̃xy , Φuy . carry over directly
to the controller implementation. We show in Section 5.5, as in the state-feedback setting, that
this transparency allows for a class of structural (locality) constraints to be imposed on the system
response (and hence the controller) that are crucial for extending controller synthesis methods to
large-scale systems. In contrast, we recall that imposing general convex constraints on the con-
troller K or directly on its state-space realization AK , BK , CK , DK do not lead to convex optimal
control problems.


Remark 5.4. The controller implementation (5.9) admits the following equivalent representation
                                             
                                  Φxx Φxy zβ          0
                                                  =      ,                               (5.10)
                                 Φux Φuy       y      u

allowing for an interesting interpretation of the controller K = Φuy − Φux Φ−1xx Φxy in terms of
Rosenbrock system matrix representations [6]. In particular, the system response (5.3) specifies a
Rosenbrock system matrix representation of the controller that achieves it.



5.2   Specialized Implementations for Open-loop Stable Systems
     In this subsection, we propose two specializations of the controller implementation in Figure
10 for open loop stable systems. From Table 3, if we set δu and δβ to 0, it follows that β =
− z1 B2 u. This leads to a simpler controller implementation given by u = Φuy y − Φux B2 u, with
the corresponding controller structure shown in Figure 11(b). This implementation can also be
obtained from the identity K = (I + Φux B2 )−1 Φuy , which follows from the relations in (5.4).
Unfortunately, as shown below, this implementation is internally stable only when the open loop
plant is stable.
     For the controller implementation and structure shown in Figure 11(b), the closed loop transfer
matrices from perturbations to the internal variables are given by
                                                                         
                                                                       δx
                                                        (zI − A)−1 B2 
                          
                         x     Φxx Φxy        Φxx B2                     δy  .
                                                                             
                            =                                                                 (5.11)
                         u     Φux Φuy I + Φux B2             I         δu 
                                                                         δβ

When A defines a stable system, the implementation in Figure 11(b) is internally stable. However,
when the open loop plant is unstable (and the realization (A, B2 ) is stabilizable), the transfer matrix

                                                   44
(zI − A)−1 B2 is unstable. From (5.11), the effect of the perturbation δβ can lead to instability of
the closed loop system. This structure thus shows the necessity of introducing and analyzing the
effects of perturbations δβ on the controller internal state.
    Alternatively, if we start with the identity K = Φuy (I +C2 Φxy )−1 , which also follows from (5.4),
we obtain the controller structure shown in Figure 11(c). The closed loop map from perturbations
to internal signals is then given by
                                                                       
                         x            Φxx         Φxy       Φxx B2          δx
                       u =         Φux         Φuy     I + Φux B2  δy  .
                         β       C2 (zI − A)−1     I  C2 (zI − A)−1 B2      δu

As can be seen, the controller implementation is once again internally stable only when the open
loop plant is stable (if the realization (A, C2 ) is detectable). This structure thus shows the necessity
of introducing and analyzing the effects of perturbations on the controller internal state β.
    Of course, when the open loop system is stable, the controller structures illustrated below may
be appealing as they are simpler and easier to implement. In fact, we can show that the controller
structure in Figure 11(b) is an alternative realization of the internal model control principle (IMC)
[65, 66] as applied to the Youla parameterization. Specifically, for open loop stable systems, the
Youla parameter is given by Q = K(I − P22 K)−1 . As is show in Lemma 5 of [54], the Youla
parameter Q is equal to the system response Φuy for open loop stable systems. We then have

                                   u = Φuy y − Φux B2 u                                          (5.12a)
                                                              −1
                                     = Qy − Φuy C2 (zI − A)        B2 u                          (5.12b)
                                     = Qy − QP22 u                                               (5.12c)
                                     = Q(y − P22 u),                                             (5.12d)

where (5.12b) is obtained by substituting Φux = Φuy C2 (zI − A)−1 from (5.5b) into (5.12a). Equa-
tion (5.12d) is exactly IMC. Thus, we see that IMC is equivalent to our proposed parameterization
(and the simplified representation shown in Figure 11(b)) for open loop stable systems.
5.3   Output Feedback with D22 6= 0
Finally, for a general proper plant model (3.1) with D22 6= 0, we define a new measurement
ȳ[t] = y[t] − D22 u[t]. This leads to the controller structure shown in Figure 12. In this case, the
closed loop transfer matrices from δu to the internal variables become
                                                                   
                                x              Φxx B2 + Φxy D22
                              u          I + Φux B2 + Φuy D22      
                               y  C2 Φxx B2 + D22 + C2 Φxy D22  δu .
                               =                                   

                                β         − z1 B2 (Φux B2 + Φuy D22 )

The remaining entries of Table 3 remain the same. Therefore, the controller structure shown in
Figure 12 internally stabilizes the plant.

System Level and Youla Parameterizations
A key difference between the SL and Youla parameterizations is the manner in which they char-
acterize the achievable closed loop responses of a system. The Youla parameterization provides


                                                   45
                          y     +              Q                      u

                                              P22
                                      (a) Internal Model Control




                                           (b) Structure 1




                                           (c) Structure 2

                  Figure 11: Alternative controller structures for stable systems.




           Figure 12: The proposed output feedback controller structure for D22 6= 0.


an image space representation of the achievable system responses, parameterized explicitly by the
free Youla parameter. This parameterization lends itself naturally to efficient computation via the
standard and theoretically supported approach [3] of restricting the Youla parameter and objec-
tive function to be FIR. However, despite this ease of computation, as alluded to in Section 1.1,
imposing sparsity constraints on the controller via the Youla parameter in general intractable.
    In contrast, the proposed SL parameterization specifies a kernel space representation of achiev-


                                                 46
able system responses, parameterized implicitly by the affine space (5.5a) - (5.5b). While our
discussion highlights the benefits and flexibility of the SL approach, there is the important caveat
that the affine constraints (5.5a) - (5.5b) are in general infinite dimensional. Hence, although the
parameterization is a convex one, it does not immediately lend itself to efficient computation. How-
ever, much as in the state-feedback setting, imposing (approximate) FIR constraints on the system
responses leads to a finite-dimensional optimization problem.

5.4      Output Feedback System Level Synthesis
We conclude this subsection by formulating the general output feedback SLS problem. Proceeding
as in Section 4, we use Theorem 5.1 to pose the following optimal control problem

                                  minΦxx ,Φux ,Φxy ,Φuy g(Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy )
                                           subject to constraints (5.5)                                         (5.13)
                                                        Φx , Φu ∈ z1 RH∞ ∩ S,

where as before, g(·) is an appropriately specified objective function, constraints (5.5) ensure achiev-
ability of the resulting system responses, and S can be used to impose SLCs. A typical choice for
the objective function g(·) is
                                                                            
                                                           Φxx Φxy        B1
                      g(Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy ) = C1 D12                          ,               (5.14)
                                                              Φux Φuy D21

for k·k a suitably chosen system norm such as H2 , H∞ , or L1 .
    In the next subsection, we show how the imposition of localized SLCs once again leads to
scalable controller synthesis in the distributed setting.

5.5      Distributed Control, Locality, and Scalability
In this section, we extend the separable objectives and constraints introduced previously to encom-
pass a class of partially separable objectives and constraints, and show how these properties can
be exploited to solve the general form of the output feedback SLS problem (5.13) when locality
constraints are imposed in a scalable manner by using distributed optimization techniques such as
ADMM.10 We further show that many constrained optimal control problems are partially separa-
ble. Examples include the (localized) H2 optimal control problem with joint sensor and actuator
regularization and the (localized) mixed H2 /L1 optimal control problem.
    We begin by defining the partial separability of a generic optimization problem. We then
specialize our discussion to partially separable instances of the SLS problem (5.13), before ending
this section with a discussion of computational techniques that can be used to accelerate the ADMM
algorithm as applied to solving partially separable SLS problems.
    Before proceeding, we remark that although, as we show below, many SLOs and SLCs of
interest satisfy our definition of partial separability, some classical measures of performance do not.
For instance the H∞ norm of the closed loop response is not partially separable. This however
hints at an interesting direction for future work: can suitable notions of robustness to `2 bounded
disturbances be defined for the large-scale setting that are partially separable?
 10
      Note that (5.13) is neither column-wise nor row-wise separable due to the coupling constraints (5.5a) and (5.5b).



                                                           47
5.6    Partially Separable Problems
We begin with a generic optimization problem given by

                                                minimize       g(Φ)                                          (5.15a)
                                                     Φ
                                               subject to      Φ ∈ S,                                        (5.15b)

where Φ is a m × n transfer matrix, g(·) a functional objective, and S a set constraint. We assume
that the optimization problem (5.15) can be written in the form

                                          minimize       g (r) (Φ) + g (c) (Φ)                               (5.16a)
                                               Φ
                                        subject to       Φ ∈ S (r) ∩ S (c) ,                                 (5.16b)

where g (r) and S (r) are row-wise separable11 and g (c) and S (c) are column-wise separable. If
optimization problem (5.15) can be written in the form of problem (5.16), then optimization problem
(5.15) is called partially separable.
    Due to the coupling between the row-wise and column-wise separable components, optimiza-
tion problem (5.16) admits neither a row-wise nor a column-wise decomposition. Our strategy is
to instead use distributed optimization techniques such as ADMM to decouple the row-wise sep-
arable component and the column-wise separable components: we show that this leads to iterate
subproblems that are column/row-wise separable, allowing the results of the previous section to be
applied to solve the iterate subproblems using localized and parallel computation.
Definition 2. Let {r1 , . . . , rq } be a partition of the set {1, · · · , m} and {c1 , . . . , cp } be a partition of
the set {1, · · · , n}. The functional objective g(Φ) in (5.15a) is said to be partially separable with
respect to the row-wise partition {r1 , . . . , rq } and the column-wise partition {c1 , . . . , cp } if g(Φ) can
be written as the sum of g (r) (Φ) and g (c) (Φ), where g (r) (Φ) is row-wise separable with respect to the
row-wise partition {r1 , . . . , rq } and g (c) (Φ) is column-wise separable with respect to the column-wise
partition {c1 , . . . , cp }. Specifically, we have

                                            g(Φ) = g (r) (Φ) + g (c) (Φ)
                                                     q
                                                          (r)
                                                    X
                                        g (r) (Φ) =      gj (Φ(rj , :))
                                                         j=1
                                                    p
                                                       (c)
                                                    X
                                        g (c) (Φ) =   gj (Φ(:, cj ))                                          (5.17)
                                                         j=1

                          (r)                               (c)
for some functionals gj (·) for j = 1, . . . , q, and gj (·) for j = 1, . . . , p.
Example 8. Let Φ be the optimization variable, and E and F be two matrices of compatible
dimension. The objective function
                                   kEΦk2F + kΦF k2F
is then partially separable. Specifically, the first term is column-wise separable, and the second term
is row-wise separable.
  11
    Row-wise separability of functions and constraint sets is defined in the obvious manner, analogous to column-wise
separability from Definition 5.


                                                          48
Definition 3. The set constraint S in (5.15b) is said to be partially separable with respect to the
row-wise partition {r1 , . . . , rq } and the column-wise partition {c1 , . . . , cp } if S can be written as the
intersection of two sets S (r) and S (c) , where S (r) is row-wise separable with respect to the row-wise
partition {r1 , . . . , rq } and S (c) is column-wise separable with respect to the column-wise partition
{c1 , . . . , cp }. Specifically, we have

                                                S         =      S (r) ∩ S (c)
                                                                                      (r)
                                    Φ ∈ S (r)         ⇐⇒             Φ(rj , :) ∈ Sj , ∀j
                                                                                      (c)
                                    Φ ∈ S (c)         ⇐⇒             Φ(:, cj ) ∈ Sj , ∀j                  (5.18)
                 (r)                                (c)
for some sets Sj       for j = 1, . . . , q and Sj        for j = 1, . . . , p.
Example 9 (Affine Subspace). The affine subspace constraint
                                            GΦ = H             and     ΦE = F
is partially separable. Specifically, the first constraint is column-wise separable, and the second is
row-wise separable.
Example 10 (Induced Matrix Norm). The induced 1-norm of a matrix Φ is given by
                                                                     m
                                                                     X
                                             kΦk1 = max                    |Φij |,
                                                            1≤j≤n
                                                                     i=1

and the induced ∞-norm of a matrix is given by
                                                                      n
                                                                      X
                                            kΦk∞ = max                      |Φij |.
                                                            1≤i≤m
                                                                      j=1

The following constraint is partially separable:
                                        kΦk1 ≤ γ1             and    kΦk∞ ≤ γ∞ .
Specifically, the first term is column-wise separable, and the second term is row-wise separable.
     Assume now that the objective and the constraints in optimization problem (5.15) are both
partially separable with respect to a row-wise partition {r1 , . . . , rq } and a column-wise partition
{c1 , . . . , cp }. In this case, the optimization problem (5.15) is partially separable and can be rewritten
in the form specified by equation (5.16). We now propose an ADMM based algorithm that exploits
the partially separable structure of the optimization problem. As we show in the next subsection,
when this method is applied to the SLS problem (5.13), the iterate subproblems are column/row-
wise separable, allowing us to apply the methods described in Section 4.3. In particular, if locality
constraints are imposed, iterate subproblems can be solved using localized and parallel computation.
     Let Ψ be a duplicate of the optimization variable Φ. We define the extended-real-value func-
tionals h(r) (Φ) and h(c) (Ψ) by
                                                       (r)
                                            (r)         g (Φ) if Φ ∈ S (r)
                                           h (Φ) =
                                                        ∞        otherwise
                                                       (c)
                                                        g (Ψ) if Ψ ∈ S (c)
                                           h(c) (Ψ) =                                                  (5.19)
                                                        ∞        otherwise.

                                                               49
Problem (5.16) can then be reformulated as

                                   minimize        h(r) (Φ) + h(c) (Ψ)
                                     {Φ,Ψ}
                                  subject to       Φ = Ψ.                                       (5.20)

Problem (5.20) can be solved using ADMM [67]:
                                             ρ                    
                      Φk+1 = argmin h(r) (Φ) + ||Φ − Ψk + Λk ||2H2
                                  Φ           2
                                                                                               (5.21a)
                                               ρ                      
                        Ψk+1 = argmin h(c) (Ψ) + ||Ψ − Φk+1 − Λk ||2H2
                                  Ψ             2
                                                                                               (5.21b)
                        Λk+1 = Λk + Φk+1 − Ψk+1                                                (5.21c)

where the square of the H2 norm is computed as in (4.14).
    In Appendix B of [55], we provide stopping criterion and prove convergence of the ADMM
algorithm (5.21a) - (5.21c) to an optimal solution of (5.16) (or equivalently, (5.20)) under the
following assumptions.

Assumption 3. Problem (5.16) has a feasible solution in the relative interior of the set S.

Assumption 4. The functionals g (r) (·) and g (c) (·) are closed, proper, and convex.

Assumption 5. The sets S (r) and S (c) are closed and convex.

    We note that these assumptions are satisfied by typical SLCs that one may wish to apply. For
instance, all of the examples considered in this paper satisfy these conditions so long as they specify
a non-empty feasible set.

5.7   Partially Separable SLS Problems
We now specialize our discussion to the output feedback SLS problem (5.13). We use
                                                      
                                              Φxx Φxy
                                        Φ=
                                              Φux Φuy

to represent the system response we want to optimize for. Denote by ZAB the transfer matrix
                                                                  >
  zI − A −B2 , and by ZAC the transfer matrix zI − A> −C2> . Let JB be the matrix in the
                                               

right-hand-side of (5.5a) and JC be the matrix in the right-hand-side of (5.5b). The localized SLS
problem (5.13) can then be written as

                                       minimize     g(Φ)                                       (5.22a)
                                             Φ
                                      subject to    ZAB Φ = JB                                 (5.22b)
                                                    ΦZAC = JC                                  (5.22c)
                                                    Φ∈S                                        (5.22d)


                                                   50
with S = L ∩ FT ∩ X . Note that as already discussed, the affine subspace constraints (5.22b)
and (5.22c) are partially separable with respect to arbitrary column-wise and row-wise partitions,
respectively. Thus the SLS problem (5.22) is partially separable if the SLO (5.22a) and the SLC
Φ ∈ X are partially separable.
    In particular, if X is partially separable, we can express the original SLC S as an intersection of
the sets S (r) = L∩FT ∩X (r) and S (c) = L∩FT ∩X (c) , where X (r) is a row-wise separable component
of X and X (c) a column-wise separable component of X . Note that the locality constraint and the
FIR constraint are included in both S (r) and S (c) . This is the key point to allow the subroutines
(5.21a) - (5.21b) of the ADMM algorithm to be solved using the techniques described in Section
4.3.
    To illustrate how the iterate subproblems of the ADMM algorithm (5.21), as applied to the SLS
problem (5.22), can be solved using localized and parallel computation, we analyze in more detail
the iterate subproblem (5.21b), which is given by
                                                     ρ
                            minimize     g (c) (Ψ) + ||Ψ − Φk+1 − Λk ||2H2                     (5.23a)
                                Ψ                    2
                                                 (c)
                           subject to    Ψ∈S                                                   (5.23b)

with S (c) = L∩FT ∩X (c) . The H2 norm regularizer in (5.23a) is column-wise separable with respect
to arbitrary column-wise partition. As the objective g (c) (·) and the constraint S (c) are column-wise
separable with respect to a given column-wise partition, we can use the column-wise separation
technique described in the previous section to decompose (5.23) into parallel subproblems. Then, as
in the state-feedback setting, we can then exploit the locality constraint L to reduce the dimension
of each subproblem from global to local scale. Similarly, iterate subproblem (5.21a) can also be
solved using parallel and localized computation by exploiting its row-wise separability. Finally,
update equation (5.21c) trivially decomposes element-wise since it is a matrix addition.
    We now give some examples of partially separable SLOs.

Example 11 (Norm Optimal Control). Consider the SLO of the optimal control problem in (5.13)
with objective function as in (5.14) and norm given by the square   of the H2 norm. Suppose that
there exists a permutation matrix Π such that the matrix B1> D21  > Π is block diagonal. It is then

possible to find a column-wise partition to decompose the SLO in a column-wise
                                                                                manner. Similarly,
suppose that there exists a permutation matrix Π such that the matrix C1 D12 Π is block diagonal.
We can find a row-wise partition to decompose the SLO in a row-wise manner. In both cases, the
SLO is column/row-wise separable and thus partially separable.

Example 12 (Sensor and Actuator Norm). Consider the weighted actuator norm defined in [68,
47], which is given by
                                            nu
                                            X
                                               µi ||e>
                                                           
                          ||µ Φux Φuy ||U =          i Φux Φuy ||H2                             (5.24)
                                                 i=1

where µ is a diagonal matrix with µi ≥ 0 being its ith diagonal entry, and ei is a unit vector ith
entry set to 1, and 0 elsewhere. The actuator norm (5.24) can be viewed as an infinite dimensional
analog to the weighted `1 /`2 norm, also known as the group lasso [69] in the statistical learning
                      norm asa regularizer to a SLS problem induces row-wise sparse structure in
literature. Adding this
the transfer matrix Φux Φuy . Recall from Theorem 5.1 that the controller achieving the desired

                                                  51
                                                                                                   
system response can be implemented via (5.9). If the ith row of the transfer matrix Φux Φuy
is identically zero, then the ith component of the control action ui is always equal to zero, and
therefore the actuator at node i corresponding to control action ui can be removed without changing
the closed loop response. It is clear that the actuator norm defined in (5.24) is row-wise separable
with respect to arbitrary row-wise partition. This still holds true when the actuator norm is defined
by the `1 /`∞ norm. Similarly, consider the weighted sensor norm given by
                                                 ny            
                                      Φxy          X          Φxy
                                 ||         λ||Y =    λi ||         e ||                       (5.25)
                                      Φuy                     Φuy i H2
                                                          i=1

where λ is a diagonal matrix with λi ≥ 0 being its ith diagonal entry. The sensor norm (5.25),
                                                                                             > >
when added as a regularizer, induces column-wise sparsity in the transfer matrix Φ>
                                                                                              
                                                                                        xy Φuy   .
Using the controller implementation (5.9), the sensor norm can therefore be viewed as regularizing
the number of sensors used by a controller. For instance, if the ith column of the transfer matrix
 >         >
 Φxy Φ>  uy    is identically zero, then the sensor at node i and its corresponsing measurement yi
can be removed without changing the closed loop response. The sensor norm defined in (5.24) is
column-wise separable with respect to any column-wise partition.
Example 13 (Combination). From Definition 2, it is straightforward to see that the class of
partially separable SLOs with respect to the same partitions are closed under summation. Therefore,
we can combine the partially separable SLOs described above, and the resulting SLO is still partially
separable. For instance, consider the SLO given by
                                                                             
                                                           Φxx Φxy         B1
                                                                                  ||2
                                                 
                   g(Φxx , Φux , Φxy , Φuy ) = || C1 D12
                                                              Φux Φuy D21 H2
                                                                              
                                                                         Φxy
                                               +||µ Φux Φuy ||U + ||             λ||Y         (5.26)
                                                                          Φuy
where µ and λ are non-negative diagonal matrices specifying the relative weighting between the closed
loop H2 performance, and the actuator and sensor norm
                                                         penalties, respectively. If there exists a
permutation matrix Π such that the matrix C1 D12 Π is block diagonal, then the SLO (5.26) is
partially separable. Specifically, the H2 norm and the actuator regularizer belong to the row-wise
separable component, and the sensor regularizer belongs to the column-wise separable component.12
    We now provide some examples of partially separable SLCs.
Example 14 (L1 Constraint). The L1 norm of a transfer matrix is given by its worst case `∞ to
`∞ gain. In particular, the L1 norm [70] of a FIR transfer matrix G ∈ FT is given by
                                                                 T
                                                                XX
                                        ||G||L1 = max                      |gij [t]|.                          (5.27)
                                                      i
                                                                 j   t=0

We can therefore add the constraint
                                                                
                                            Φxx Φxy             B1
                                         ||                          || ≤ γ                                    (5.28)
                                            Φux Φuy             D21 L1
   12
      Note that an alternative penalty is proposed in [68] for the design of joint actuation and sensing architectures;
it is however more involved to define, and hence we restrict ourself to this alternative penalty for the purposes of
illustrating the concept of partially separable SLOs.


                                                          52
to the optimization problem (5.22) for some γ to control the worst-case amplification of `∞ bounded
signals. From the definition (5.27), the SLC (5.28) is row-wise separable with respect to any row-
wise partition.

Example 15 (Combination). From Definition 3, the class of partially separable SLCs with respect
to the same row and column partitions are closed under intersection, allowing for partially separable
SLCs to be combined. For instance, the combination of a locality constraint L, a FIR constraint
FT , and an L1 constraint as in equation (5.28) is partially separable. This property is extremely
useful as it provides a unified framework for dealing with several partially separable constraints at
once.

   Using the previously described examples of partially separable SLOs and SLCs, we now consider
two partially separable SLS problems: (i) the localized H2 optimal control problem with joint sensor
and actuator regularization, and (ii) the localized mixed H2 /L1 optimal control problem. These
two problems are used in Section 5.9 as case study examples.

Example 16. The localized H2 optimal control problem with joint sensor and actuator regulariza-
tion is given by

                                minimize           (5.26)                                    (5.29a)
                           {Φxx ,Φux ,Φxy ,Φuy }

                                   subject to      (5.5a) − (5.5c)                           (5.29b)
                                                              
                                                     Φxx Φxy
                                                                 ∈ C ∩ L ∩ FT .              (5.29c)
                                                     Φux Φuy

where C encodes the information sharing constraints
                                                    the distributed controller. If there exists a
                                                    of
permutation matrix Π such that the matrix C1 D12 Π is block diagonal, then (5.29) is partially
separable.

Remark 5.5. When the actuator and sensor norm penalties are zero, problem (5.29) reduces to
the localized LQG optimal control problem defined and solved in [46]. Further, if the locality and
FIR constraints are removed, we recover the standard LQG optimal control problem, which is also
seen to be partially separable.

   Next we consider the localized mixed H2 /L1 optimal control problem.

Example 17. The localized mixed H2 /L1 optimal control problem is given by
                                                            
                                                 Φxx Φxy    B1
                         minimize           ||                   ||2                         (5.30a)
                      {Φxx ,Φux ,Φxy ,Φuy }     Φux Φuy D21 H2
                                 subject to        (5.5a) − (5.5c), (5.28), (5.29c)          (5.30b)

which is partially separable.

    The localized mixed H2 /L1 optimal control problem can be used to design the tradeoff between
average and worst-case performance, as measured by the H2 and L1 norms of the closed loop
system, respectively.



                                                       53
5.8   Analytic Solution and Acceleration
Suppose that the Assumptions 3 - 5 in Section 5.6 hold. The ADMM algorithm presented in (5.21)
is a special case of the proximal algorithm [71, 72, 67]. For certain type of objective functionals
h(r) (·) and h(c) (·), the proximal operators can be evaluated analytically (see Ch. 6 of [72]). In this
situation, we only need to evaluate the proximal operators once, and iterate (5.21a) and (5.21b) in
closed form. This improves the overall computation time significantly. In Appendix C of [55], it is
shown how to express the solutions of (5.21a) and (5.21b) using proximal operators. Here we list
a few examples for which the proximal operators can be evaluated analytically.

Example 18. Consider the LLQG problem proposed in [46]. When the global optimization problem
is decomposed into parallel subproblems, each subproblem is a convex quadratic program restricted
to an affine set. In this case, the proximal operator is an affine function [46, 72, 67]. We only
need to calculate this affine function once. The iteration in (5.21a) - (5.21c) can then be carried
out using multiple matrix multiplications in the reduced dimension, which significantly improves the
overall computation time.

Example 19. Consider the LLQR problem with actuator regularization [47], which is the state
feedback version of (5.29). The column-wise separable component of this problem is identical to
that of the LLQG example, and therefore the update subproblem (5.21b) can be solved using matrix
multiplication, as described in the previous example. We further showed in [47] that the row-
wise separable component of this problem can be simplified to multiple unconstrained optimization
problems, each with proximal operators given by vectorial soft-thresholding [72]. This offers an
efficient way to solve the update supbroblem (5.21a).

    We end this section by noting that although our focus has been on how ADMM can be used
to efficiently solve the localized SLS problem (5.13), there exist other distributed algorithms that
can exploit partial separability to improve computational efficiency. For instance, if either g (r) (·)
or g (c) (·) is strongly convex, we can use the alternating minimization algorithm (AMA) [73] to
simplify the ADMM algorithm.

5.9   Case Studies
In this section, we apply the localized H2 optimal control with sensor actuator regularization (5.29)
problem and the localized mixed H2 /L1 optimal control problem (5.30) to a power system inspired
example. After introducing the power system model, we show that the localized H2 controller, with
its additional locality, FIR and communication delay constraints can achieve comparable closed loop
performance to that of a centralized H2 optimal controller. We further demonstrate the scalability
of the proposed method by synthesizing a localized H2 controller for a randomized heterogeneous
networked system with 12800 states using a single laptop; for such a large system, neither the
centralized nor the distributed optimal controllers can be computed. We then solve the localized
H2 optimal control problem with joint sensor and actuator regularization to co-design an output
feedback controller and its actuation/sensing architecture. Finally, we solve the localized mixed
H2 /L1 optimal control problem, thus identifying the achievable tradeoff curve between the average
and worst-case performance of the closed loop system.




                                                  54
5.10           Power System Model
We begin with a randomized spanning tree embedded on a 10 × 10 mesh network representing
the interconnection between subsystems. The resulting interconnected topology is shown in Fig.
13(a) – we assume that all edges are undirected. The dynamics of each subsystem is given by the
    11

    10

       9

       8

       7
                                                                       ✓i               ✓j
       6

       5

       4



                                                                       ✓˙i              ✓˙j
       3

       2

       1

       0
           0      2 (a) Interconnected
                           4       6   topology
                                           8        10     (b) Interaction between neighboring subsystems

                               Figure 13: Simulation example interaction graph.

discretized swing equations. Consider the swing dynamics

                            mi θ¨i + di θ˙i = −
                                                X
                                                  kij (θi − θj ) + wi + ui                                  (5.31)
                                                         j∈Ni


where θi , θ˙i , mi , di , wi , ui are the phase angle deviation, frequency deviation, inertia, damping,
external disturbance, and control action of the controllable load of bus i. The coefficient kij is
the coupling term between buses i and j. We let xi := [θi θ˙i ]> be the state of bus i and use
eA∆t ≈ I + A∆t to discretize the swing dynamics. Equation (5.31) can then be expressed in the
form
                                                      X
                            xi [t + 1] = Aii xi [t] +    Aij xj [t] + Bii ui [t] + δxi [t]
                                                          j∈Ni
                                 yi [t] = Cii xi [t] + δyi [t],                                             (5.32)

with                                                                         "     #
                                                                              0  0
                                                             
                                            1          ∆t
                              Aii =        ki           di      ,    Aij = kij       ,
                                          −m i
                                               ∆t    1− m i
                                                            ∆t             mi ∆t 0
                >                                P
and Bii = 0 1 . We set ∆t = 0.2 and ki =             j∈Ni kij . In addition, the parameters kij , di ,
       −1
and mi are randomly generated and uniformly distributed between [0.5, 1], [1, 1.5], and [0, 2],
respectively. The interaction between neighboring subsystems of the discretized model is illustrated
in Figure 13(b). We initially assume that each subsystem in the power network has a phase
measurement unit (PMU), a frequency sensor, and a controllable load that generates ui .
    From (5.31), the external disturbance wi only directly affects the frequency deviation θ˙i . To
make the objective functional strongly convex, we introduce a small artificial disturbance on the


                                                            55
phase deviation θi as well. We assume that the process noise on frequency and phase are un-
correlated and independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian random variables with
zero mean, and covariance matrices given by I and 10−4 I, respectively. In addition, we assume
that both the phase deviation and the frequency deviation are measured with some sensor noise.
The sensor noise of phase and frequency measurements are uncorrelated i.i.d. Gaussian random
variables with zero mean, and covariance matrices
                                                   both given by 10−2 I. We choose equal penalty
on the state deviation and control effort, i.e., C1 D12 = I.
    Based on the above setting, we formulate a H2 optimal control problem that minimizes the
H2 norm of the transfer matrix from the process and sensor noises to the regulated output. The
H2 norm of the closed loop is given by 13.3169 when a proper centralized H2 optimal controller
is applied, and 16.5441 when a strictly proper centralized H2 optimal controller is applied. In the
rest of this section, we normalize the H2 norm with respect to the proper centralized H2 optimal
controller.

5.11    Localized H2 Optimal Control
The underlying assumption of the centralized optimal control scheme is that measurements can be
instantaneously transmitted among all subsystems in the network. To incorporate realistic commu-
nication delay constraints and facilitate the scalability of controller design, we impose additional
communication delay constraints, locality constraints, and a FIR constraint on the system response.
     For the communication delay constraint C, we assume that each subsystem takes one time step
to transmit information to its neighboring subsystems. Therefore, if subsystems i and j are k-hops
apart (as defined by the interaction graph illustrated in Figure 13(a)), then the control action ui [t]
at subsystem i can only use the measurements yj [τ ] and internal controller state βj [τ ] of subsystem
j if τ ≤ t − k.
     The interaction between subsystems illustrated in Fig. 13(b) implies that it takes two discrete
time steps for a disturbance at subsystem j to propagate to its neighboring subsystems, and hence
the communication speed between sub-controllers is twice as fast as the propagation speed of
disturbances through the plant. For the given communication delay constraint C, we use the
method in [47] to design the tightest feasible locality constraint L. In this example, we can localize
the joint effect of the process and sensor noise at subsystem j to a region defined by its two-hop
neighbors (where one hop is as defined in terms of the interaction graph of the system). This
implies that the sub-controller at node j only needs to transmit its measurements yj and controller
states βj within this localized region, and further only a restricted plant model (as defined by this
localized region) is needed to synthesize its corresponding local control policy.
     Assuming a fixed communication delay constraint C and locality constraint L, we first explore
the tradeoff between the length T of the FIR constraint FT and the transient performance of the
closed loop system. Figure 14 shows the tradeoff curve between the transient performance of the
localized H2 controller and the length T of the FIR constraint. For the given communication
delay constraint C and the locality constraint L, the localized H2 controller is feasible for FIR
constraints FT whenever T ≥ 3. When the length of the FIR constraint increases, the H2 norm
of the closed loop converges quickly to the unconstrained optimal value. For instance, for FIR
lengths of T = 7, 10, and 20, the performance degradations of the localized FIR controllers with
respect to the unconstrained H2 optimal controller are given by 3.8%, 1.0%, and 0.1%, respectively.
This further means that the performance degradation due to the additional communication delay
constraint C and the locality constraint L is less than 0.1%. From Figure 14, we see that the

                                                  56
localized H2 controller, with its additional communication delay, locality and FIR constraints can
achieve similar transient performance to that of an unconstrained centralized (unimplementable)
optimal H2 controller.


                                   1.4                             Localized
                                                                   Centralized (p)
                                                                   Centralized (sp)
                                   1.3


                                   1.2


                                   1.1


                                    1
                                         0         5       10         15              20


Figure 14: The vertical axis is the normalized H2 norm of the closed loop when the localized H2
controller is applied. The localized H2 controller is subject to the constraint C ∩ L ∩ FT . The
horizontal axis is the horizon T of the FIR constraint FT , which is also the settling time of an
impulse disturbance. We plot the normalized H2 norm for the centralized unconstrained optimal
controller (proper and strictly proper) in the same figure.

    To further illustrate the advantages of the localized control scheme, we choose T = 20 and com-
pare the localized optimal controller, distributed optimal controller, and the centralized optimal
controller in terms of closed loop performance, complexity of controller synthesis and implemen-
tation, as well as ease of redesign,13 in Table 4. The distributed optimal controller is computed
using the method described in [74], in which we assume the same communication constraint C as
the localized optimal controller. It can be seen that the localized controller is vastly preferable in
all aspects, except for a slight degradation in the closed-loop performance.

            Table 4: Comparison Between Centralized, Distributed, and Localized Control

                                                                Cent.      Dist.           Local.
                                             Affected region    Global     Global          2-hop
                      Closed Loop            Affected time      Long       Long            20 steps
                                             Normalized H2      1          1.001           1.001
                                             Complexity         O(n3 )     ≥ O(n3 )        O(n)
                      Synthesis              Plant model        Global     Global          2-hop
                                             Redesign           Global     Global          Local
                      Implement.             Comm. Speed        ∞          2               2
                                             Comm. Range        Global     Global          2-hop


       We now allow the size of the problem to vary and compare the computation time needed to
  13
    The ability to locally redesign subsets of the control system has the appealing feature of allowing for real-time
redesign in the case of local changes to the plant model.


                                                           57
synthesize a centralized, distributed, and localized H2 optimal controller. We choose T = 7 for the
localized controller. The empirical relationship obtained between computation time and problem
size for different control schemes is illustrated in Figure 5. It is easily seen that the computation time
needed for the distributed controller grows rapidly when the size of problem increases. The slope of
the line describing the computation time of the centralized controller in the log-log plot of Figure
5 is 3, which matches the theoretical complexity O(n3 ). The slope for the localized H2 controller is
about 1.4, which is larger than the theoretical value of 1. As mentioned previously, we believe this
overhead may be caused by other computational issues, such as memory management. We note
that the computational bottleneck faced in computing our large-scale example arises from using a
single laptop to compute the controller (and hence the localized subproblems were solved in serial)
– in practice, if each local subsystem is capable of solving its corresponding localized subproblem,
our approach scales to systems of arbitrary size as all computations can be done in parallel. For
the largest example that we have, we can compute the optimal localized H2 controller for a system
with 12800 states in 22 minutes using MATLAB with an ASUS laptop with Intel i7-3610QM @
2.3GHz CPU and 8 GB of RAM. If the computation is parallelized across all 6400 sub-systems,
the synthesis algorithm can be completed within 0.2 seconds. In contrast, the theoretical time to
compute the centralized H2 optimal controller for the same example is more than a week.

5.12    Localized H2 Optimal Control with Joint Sensor and Actuator Regular-
        ization
We now move back to the 10 × 10 mesh example shown in Figure 13(a). In the previous subsection,
we assumed that each subsystem in the power network had a phase sensor, a frequency sensor,
and a controllable load. In practice, the installation of these sensors and actuators is expensive:
therefore we explore the tradeoff between the closed loop performance of the system and the number
of sensors and actuators being used. A challenging problem is to determine the optimal locations
of these sensors and actuators due to the combinatorial nature of this task. In this subsection, we
apply the regularization for design (RFD) [68] framework to jointly design the localized optimal
controller and the optimal locations of sensors and actuators in the power network. This is achieved
by solving the localized H2 optimal control problem with joint sensor and actuator regularization
(5.29).
    In order to allow for more flexibility in sensor and actuator placement, we increase the localized
region of each process and sensor noise from its two-hop neighbors to its four-hop neighbors. This
implies that each subsystem j needs to exchange information with up to its four-hop neighbors,
and use the plant model restricted to this four-hop neighborhood to synthesize the localized H2
controller. Similarly, the length of the FIR constraint FT is increased to T = 30. The initial
localized H2 cost is given by 13.3210, which is a 0.03% degradation with respect to the optimal
centralized H2 controller. We assume that the relative prices between each frequency sensor, PMU,
and controllable load are 1, 100, and 300, respectively. This is to model the fact that actuators are
typically more expensive than sensors, and that PMUs are typically more expensive than frequency
sensors. The price for the same types of sensors and actuators at different locations remains
constant.
    We begin with a dense controller architecture composed of 100 controllable loads, 100 PMUs,
and 100 frequency sensors, i.e., one of each type of sensor and actuator at each node. Using
optimization problem (5.29) to identify the sparsest possible architecture that still satisfies the
locality, FIR and communication delay constraints, we are able to remove 43 controllable loads and

                                                   58
                                     11

                                     10

                                      9

                                      8

                                      7

                                      6

                                      5

                                      4

                                      3

                                      2

                                      1

                                      0
                                          0   2   4    6    8     10

Figure 15: The upward-pointing triangles represent the subsystems in which the PMU is removed.
The downward-pointing triangles represent the subsystems in which the controllable load (actuator)
is removed.

46 PMUs from the system (no frequency sensors were removed due to the chosen relative pricing).
The locations of the removed sensors and actuators are shown in Figure 15. We argue that this
sensing and actuation interface is very sparse. In particular, we only use 57 controllable loads to
control process noise from 200 states and sensor noise from 154 states, while ensuring that the
system response to all process and sensor disturbances remains both localized and FIR.
    The localized H2 cost for the system with reduced number of sensors and actuators is given by
17.8620. In comparison, the cost achieved by a proper centralized optimal controller is 16.2280, and
the cost achieved by a strictly proper centralized optimal controller is 18.4707. Note that as the
sensing and actuation interface becomes sparser, the performance gap between the centralized and
the localized controller becomes larger. Nevertheless, we note that the performance degradation is
only 10% compared to the proper centralized optimal scheme implemented using the same sparse
controller architecture.

5.13    Localized Mixed H2 /L1 Optimal Control
Finally, we solve the localized mixed H2 /L1 optimal control problem in (5.30) on the 10 × 10 mesh
example shown in Figure 13(a). We progressively reduce the allowable L1 gain γ, as shown in
equation (5.30), to explore the tradeoff between average and worst-case performance of a system.
We plot the normalized H2 norm and the normalized L1 norm in Figure 16.14 The left-top point
in Figure 16 is the localized H2 solution. When we start reducing the L1 sublevel set, the H2 norm
of the closed loop response gradually increases, thus tracing out a tradeoff curve.

5.14    Summary
In this section, we extended many of the state-feedback results from Section 4 to the output feedback
setting. In particular, we showed that by exploiting the partial separability of many SLS problems
of interest, output feedback problems also enjoy improved the scalability via a decomposition and
dimensionality reduction based method combined with distributed optimization methods such as
ADMM. Lacking in the output feedback setting however is an analogous family of robustness results
to those presented in Section 4.5. Although preliminary results exist [22], this remains in important
direction for future work.
  14
    We normalize the H2 performance with respect to that achieved by the optimal localized H2 controller, and
likewise normalize the L1 performance with respect to that achieved by the optimal localized L1 controller.



                                                      59
                                  1.3


                                 1.25


                                  1.2


                                 1.15


                                  1.1


                                 1.05


                                   1
                                        1    1.05        1.1    1.15



Figure 16: The vertical axis represents the normalized L1 norm of the closed loop, and the horizontal
axis represents the normalized H2 norm of the closed loop.


6    Conclusions
This article reviewed the System Level Synthesis framework. Our aim was to provide a self-
contained and accessible resource that summarizes progress in developing this novel approach to
controller synthesis. We highlighted the benefits that SLS provides in the context of distributed
control and in robust control. As we hope we were able to show, by working directly with system
responses, there is a transparency in how system constraints, structure, and uncertainty affect
controller synthesis, implementation, and performance, and it is this transparency that we exploit
throughout to improve upon the state-of-the-art. As lengthy as this article is, we believe that
we have just begun to scratch the surface of what SLS can do. Exciting current directions of
research focus upon integrating SLS into model predictive control algorithms, further understanding
the algebraic structure underlying localized controllers and their state-space realizations, further
developing robust SLS theory (especially in the output feedback setting), and applying these tools
to application areas spanning power-systems, computer networking, and machine learning/AI.


References
 [1] D. C. Youla, H. A. Jabr, and J. J. B. Jr., “Modern wiener-hopf design of optimal controllers-
     part ii: The multivariable case,” Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 21, no. 3, pp.
     319–338, 1976.

 [2] M. Vidyasagar, Control System Synthesis:A Factorization Approach, Part II.           Morgan &
     Claypool, 2011.

 [3] S. Boyd and C. Barratt, Linear controller design: limits of performance. Prentice-Hall, 1991.

 [4] M. A. Dahleh and I. J. Diaz-Bobillo, Control of uncertain systems: a linear programming
     approach. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1994.

 [5] J. Y. Ishihara and R. M. Sales, “Parametrization of admissible controllers for generalized
     rosenbrock systems,” in Decision and Control, 2000. Proceedings of the 39th IEEE Conference
     on, vol. 5. IEEE, 2000, pp. 5014–5019.


                                                    60
 [6] H. H. Rosenbrock and D. Owens, “Computer aided control system design,” IEEE Transactions
     on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 794–794, 1976.

 [7] J. C. Willems and J. W. Polderman, Introduction to mathematical systems theory: a behavioral
     approach. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013, vol. 26.

 [8] J. C. Willems and H. L. Trentelman, “Synthesis of dissipative systems using quadratic dif-
     ferential forms: Part i,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 53–69,
     2002.

 [9] H. L. Trentelman and J. C. Willems, “Synthesis of dissipative systems using quadratic differ-
     ential forms: Part ii,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 70–86,
     2002.

[10] C. Praagman, H. L. Trentelman, and R. Z. Yoe, “On the parametrization of all regularly
     implementing and stabilizing controllers,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, vol. 45,
     no. 6, pp. 2035–2053, 2007.

[11] J. C. Doyle, K. Glover, P. P. Khargonekar, and B. A. Francis, “State-space solutions to stan-
     dard H2 and H∞ control problems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 34, no. 8,
     pp. 831–847, Aug 1989.

[12] M. A. Dahleh and I. J. Diaz-Bobillo, Control of Uncertain Systems: A Linear Programming
     Approach, 1994.

[13] K. Zhou, J. C. Doyle, and K. Glover, Robust and Optimal Control, 1995.

[14] J. Doyle, “Analysis of feedback systems with structured uncertainties,” IEE Proceedings D -
     Control Theory and Applications, vol. 129, no. 6, 1982.

[15] M. K. H. Fan, A. L. Tits, and J. C. Doyle, “Robustness in the presence of mixed parametric
     uncertainty and unmodeled dynamics,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 36,
     no. 1, 1991.

[16] A. Packard and J. Doyle, “The Complex Structured Singular Value,” Automatica, vol. 29,
     no. 1, 1993.

[17] P. M. Young, M. P. Newlin, and J. C. Doyle, “µ Analysis with Real Parametric Uncertainty,”
     in IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 1991.

[18] A. Megretski and A. Rantzer, “System analysis via integral quadratic constraints,” IEEE
     Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 42, no. 6, 1997.

[19] S. Dean, H. Mania, N. Matni, B. Recht, and S. Tu, “On the sample complexity of the linear
     quadratic regulator,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.01688, 2017.

[20] S. Dean, S. Tu, N. Matni, and B. Recht, “Safely Learning to Control the Constrained Linear
     Quadratic Regulator.” arXiv:1809.10121, 2018.

[21] S. Dean, H. Mania, N. Matni, B. Recht, and S. Tu, “Regret Bounds for Robust Adaptive
     Control of the Linear Quadratic Regulator,” in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

                                               61
[22] R. Boczar, N. Matni, and B. Recht, “Finite-data performance guarantees for the output-
     feedback control of an unknown system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.09186, 2018.

[23] Y.-C. Ho and K.-C. Chu, “Team decision theory and information structures in optimal control
     problems–part i,” Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 15–22, 1972.

[24] A. Mahajan, N. Martins, M. Rotkowitz, and S. Yuksel, “Information structures in optimal
     decentralized control,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2012 IEEE 51st Annual Conference
     on, 2012, pp. 1291–1306.

[25] M. Rotkowitz and S. Lall, “A characterization of convex problems in decentralized control,”
     Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 274–286, 2006.

[26] B. Bamieh, F. Paganini, and M. A. Dahleh, “Distributed control of spatially invariant systems,”
     Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1091–1107, 2002.

[27] B. Bamieh and P. G. Voulgaris, “A convex characterization of distributed control problems
     in spatially invariant systems with communication constraints,” Systems & Control Letters,
     vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 575–583, 2005.

[28] A. Nayyar, A. Mahajan, and D. Teneketzis, “Decentralized stochastic control with partial
     history sharing: A common information approach,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
     vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1644–1658, July 2013.

[29] H. S. Witsenhausen, “A counterexample in stochastic optimum control,” SIAM Journal of
     Control, vol. 6, no. 1, 1968.

[30] J. N. Tsitsiklis and M. Athans, “On the complexity of decentralized decision making and
     detection problems,” in IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), 1984.

[31] G. E. Dullerud and R. D’Andrea, “Distributed control of heterogeneous systems,” Automatic
     Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 2113–2128, 2004.

[32] M. Rotkowitz, R. Cogill, and S. Lall, “Convexity of optimal control over networks with delays
     and arbitrary topology,” Int. J. Syst., Control Commun., vol. 2, no. 1/2/3, pp. 30–54, Jan.
     2010.

[33] L. Lessard and S. Lall, “Convexity of decentralized controller synthesis,”                 IEEE
     Transactions on Automatic Control, To appear, 2016. [Online]. Available:                    http:
     //arxiv.org/pdf/1305.5859v2.pdf

[34] ——, “Optimal controller synthesis for the decentralized two-player problem with output feed-
     back,” in 2012 IEEE American Control Conference, June 2012.

[35] P. Shah and P. A. Parrilo, “H2 -optimal decentralized control over posets: A state space solution
     for state-feedback,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2010 49th IEEE Conference on, 2010.

[36] A. Lamperski and J. C. Doyle, “Output feedback H2 model matching for decentralized systems
     with delays,” in 2013 IEEE American Control Conference, June 2013.



                                                 62
[37] L. Lessard, M. Kristalny, and A. Rantzer, “On structured realizability and stabilizability of
     linear systems,” in American Control Conference , 2013, June 2013, pp. 5784–5790.

[38] C. W. Scherer, “Structured H∞ -optimal control for nested interconnections: A state-space
     solution,” Systems and Control Letters, vol. 62, pp. 1105–1113, 2013.

[39] L. Lessard, “State-space solution to a minimum-entropy H∞ -optimal control problem with a
     nested information constraint,” in 2014 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC),
     2014.

[40] N. Matni, “Distributed control subject to delays satisfying an H∞ norm bound,” in 2014 IEEE
     Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), 2014.

[41] T. Tanaka and P. A. Parrilo, “Optimal output feedback architecture for triangular LQG prob-
     lems,” in 2014 IEEE American Control Conference, June 2014.

[42] A. Lamperski and L. Lessard, “Optimal decentralized state-feedback control with sparsity and
     delays,” Automatica, vol. 58, pp. 143–151, 2015.

[43] Y.-S. Wang, N. Matni, S. You, and J. C. Doyle, “Localized distributed state feedback control
     with communication delays,” in 2014 IEEE American Control Conference, June 2014.

[44] Y.-S. Wang, N. Matni, and J. C. Doyle, “Localized LQR optimal control,” in 2014 53rd IEEE
     Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), 2014.

[45] Y.-S. Wang and N. Matni, “Localized distributed optimal control with output feedback and
     communication delays,” in IEEE 52nd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Con-
     trol, and Computing, 2014.

[46] ——, “Localized LQG optimal control for large-scale systems,” in 2016 IEEE American Con-
     trol Conference, 2016.

[47] Y.-S. Wang, N. Matni, and J. C. Doyle, “Localized LQR control with actuator regularization,”
     in 2016 IEEE American Control Conference, 2016.

[48] Y.-S. Wang, S. You, and N. Matni, “Localized distributed Kalman filters for large-scale sys-
     tems,” in 5th IFAC Workshop on Distributed Estimation and Control in Networked Systems,
     2015.

[49] Y. S. Wang, N. Matni, and J. C. Doyle, “System level parameterizations, constraints and
     synthesis,” in 2017 American Control Conference, May 2017, pp. 1308–1315.

[50] N. Matni, Y.-S. Wang, and J. Anderson, “Scalable system level synthesis for virtually localiz-
     able systems,” in 2017 56th IEEE Conf. Decision Control, 2017.

[51] J. C. Doyle, N. Matni, Y.-S. Wang, J. Anderson, and S. Low, “System level synthesis: A
     tutorial,” in Decision and Control (CDC), 2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on. IEEE,
     2017, pp. 2856–2867.

[52] Y.-S. Wang, “A system level approach to optimal controller design for large-scale distributed
     systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, California Institute of Technology, 2016.

                                                63
[53] J. Anderson and N. Matni, “Structured State Space Realizations for SLS Distributed Con-
     trollers,” in Allerton, 2017.

[54] Y.-S. Wang, N. Matni, and J. C. Doyle, “A system level approach to controller synthesis,”
     IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 2019.

[55] ——, “Separable and localized system level synthesis for large-scale systems,” IEEE Transac-
     tions on Automatic Control, 2018.

[56] Y. Chen and J. Anderson, “System level synthesis with state and input constraints,”
     arXiv:1903.07174, 2019.

[57] S. Dean, S. Tu, N. Matni, and B. Recht, “Safely learning to control the constrained linear
     quadratic regulator,” arXiv:1809.10121, 2018.

[58] K. Zhou, J. C. Doyle, and K. Glover, Robust and optimal control. Prentice Hall New Jersey,
     1996.

[59] L. Lessard and S. Lall, “Quadratic invariance is necessary and sufficient for convexity,” in
     Proceedings of the 2011 American Control Conference, June 2011, pp. 5360–5362.

[60] Ş. Sabău and N. C. Martins, “Youla-like parametrizations subject to QI subspace constraints,”
     Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1411–1422, 2014.

[61] Y.-S. Wang, “A system level approach to optimal controller design for large-scale distributed
     systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, California Institute of Technology, 2017.

[62] A. Rantzer, “Control        synthesis   with    localizability   and   passivity   constraints,”
     arXiv:1812.07748, 2018.

[63] E. Jensen and B. Bamieh, “Optimal spatially-invariant controllers with locality constraints:
     A system level approach,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Annual American Control Conference.
     IEEE, 2018, pp. 2053–2058.

[64] J. Anderson, N. Matni, and Y. Chen, “Sparsity preserving discretization with error bounds,”
     arXiv:1903.11267, 2019.

[65] D. E. Rivera, M. Morari, and S. Skogestad, “Internal model control: Pid controller design,”
     Industrial & engineering chemistry process design and development, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 252–265,
     1986.

[66] C. E. Garcia and M. Morari, “Internal model control. a unifying review and some new results,”
     Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Process Design and Development, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 308–
     323, 1982.

[67] S. P. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed optimization and sta-
     tistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers,” Foundations and Trends
     in Machine Learning, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122, 2011.

[68] N. Matni and V. Chandrasekaran, “Regularization for design,” IEEE Transactions on Auto-
     matic Control, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 3991–4006, Dec 2016.

                                                64
[69] M. Yuan and Y. Lin, “Model selection and estimation in regression with grouped variables,”
     Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), vol. 68, no. 1, pp.
     49–67, 2006.

[70] M. Dahleh and J. Pearson, J., “l1 -optimal feedback controllers for MIMO discrete-time sys-
     tems,” Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 314–322, Apr 1987.

[71] P. L. Combettes and J.-C. Pesquet, “Proximal splitting methods in signal processing,” arXiv
     preprint, vol. arXiv:0912.3522, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0912.3522v4.
     pdf

[72] N. Parikh and S. Boyd, “Proximal algorithms,” Found. Trends Optim., vol. 1, no. 3, pp.
     127–239, Jan. 2014.

[73] P. Tseng, “Applications of a splitting algorithm to decomposition in convex programming
     and variational inequalities,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, vol. 29, no. 1, pp.
     119–138, 1991.

[74] A. Lamperski and J. C. Doyle, “The H2 control problem for quadratically invariant systems
     with delays,” Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1945–1950, 2015.




                                                 65
