                                                Sparsity and Spatial Localization Measures for
                                                         Spatially Distributed Systems∗
                                                                                  Nader Motee†              Qiyu Sun‡
arXiv:1402.4148v3 [math.OC] 15 Nov 2014




                                                                                    This version: October 2014
                                                                                   First version: Febrauray 2014



                                                                                                Abstract

                                                    We consider the class of spatially decaying systems, where the underlying dynamics are spa-
                                                tially decaying and the sensing and controls are spatially distributed. This class of systems arise
                                                in various applications where there is a notion of spatial distance with respect to which couplings
                                                between the subsystems can be quantified using a class of coupling weight functions. We exploit
                                                spatial decay property of the underlying dynamics of this class of systems to introduce a class of
                                                sparsity and spatial localization measures. We develop a new methodology based on concepts
                                                of q-Banach algebras of spatially decaying matrices that enables us to establish a relationship be-
                                                tween spatial decay properties of spatially decaying systems and their sparsity and spatial localiza-
                                                tion features. Moreover, it is shown that the inverse-closedness property of matrix algebras plays
                                                a central role in exploiting various structural properties of spatially decaying systems. We char-
                                                acterize conditions for exponentially stability of spatially decaying system over q-Banach algebras
                                                and prove that the unique solutions of the Lyapunov and Riccati equations over a proper q-Banach
                                                algebra also belong to the same q-Banach algebra. It is shown that the quadratically optimal state
                                                feedback controllers for spatially decaying systems are sparse and spatially localized in the sense
                                                that they have near-optimal sparse information structures.

                                                Keywords: Distributed control, infinite-dimensional systems, optimal control, sparsity, spatial lo-
                                                calization, spatially decaying systems.
                                                IEEE Transaction on Automatic Control. Under Review.




                                            ∗
                                               The work of N. Motee was supported by the National Science Foundation under award NSF-ECCS-1202517, by the
                                          Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award AFOSR-YIP FA9550-13-1-0158, and by the Office of Naval Research
                                          under award ONR N00014-13-1-0636. The work of Q. Sun was supported by the National Science Foundation under award
                                          NSF-DMS-1109063.
                                             †
                                               The author is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics, Packard Laboratory, Lehigh University,
                                          Bethlehem, PA. Email address: motee@lehigh.edu.
                                             ‡
                                               The author is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Central Florida, Orlando FL. Email address:
                                          qiyu.sun@ucf.edu.
1    Introduction

In a number of important applications, centralized implementation of automatic control is practi-
cally infeasible due to lack of access to centralized information. This necessitates design of dynam-
ical networks with sparse and spatially localized information structures, which is currently one of
the outstanding open problems in control systems. A precise and comprehensive analysis of spar-
sity and spatial localization for large-scale dynamical network does not appear to exist in the con-
text of distributed control systems. In this paper we investigate this problem for a broad class of
spatially distributed systems, so-called spatially decaying systems, which are linear systems with off-
diagonally decaying state-space matrices. Examples of such systems include linearized and/or spa-
tially discretized models of spatially distributed power networks with sparse interconnection topolo-
gies, multi-agent systems with nearest-neighbor coupling structures [6], arrays of micro-mirrors [7],
micro-cantilevers [8], and sensor networks. These systems belong to the class of spatio-temporal
systems, where all relevant signals are indexed by a spatial coordinate in addition to time [1].
    For the class of spatially decaying systems, we show that automatic feedback control mechanisms
can be spatially localized using far less sensor measurements and actuators than traditional control
design techniques. In particular, we exploit spatial structure of the underlying dynamics of networks
and reveal that the quadratically-optimal state feedback controllers for a broad range of real-world
dynamical networks are inherently sparse and spatially localized, in the sense that, they have near-
optimal sparse information structures.
    An important class of spatio-temporal systems includes the class of spatially invariant systems.
This class of systems can be defined over continuous or (infinite or finite dimensional) discrete spa-
tial domains. Their state space matrices consist of translation-invariant operators such as partial
differential operators with constant coefficients, spatial shift operators, spatial convolution opera-
tors, general pseudodifferential operator and integral operators [9, 10], or a linear combination of
such operators [11]. A subclass of spatially invariant systems is considered in [1, 20] where the sym-
metric spatial invariance property of this class of systems are exploited and techniques from spatial
Fourier transforms are applied to study optimal control of linear spatially invariant systems. It is
shown that the original optimal control problems in spatial domain can be transformed into a family
of finite-dimensional parameterized problems in Fourier domain and treated using standard tools
for finite-dimensional linear systems in control theory. Moreover, the seminal work [1] shows that
the corresponding quadratically-optimal controllers are spatially invariant and have an inherently
semi-decentralized information structures.
    In this paper, we consider spatially distributed systems over infinite-dimensional discrete spa-
tial domains, where the dynamics of individual subsystems are heterogeneous, and the spatial struc-
ture does not necessarily enjoy any particular spatial symmetries. Therefore, standard tools such as
Fourier analysis cannot be used to analyze this class of systems. The existing traditional methods to
study this class of problems are usually based on notions of Banach algebras. One of earliest works
in this area is [12] where the algebraic properties of Riccati equations is studied over C ∗ –subalgebras
of the space of bounded linear operators on some Hilbert space. More recent effort is reported [16]


                                                   2
where the algebraic properties of Riccati equations is investigated over noncommutative involutive
Banach algebras, which can be considered as a generalization of earlier results of [12]. Our paper
is close in spirit to earlier works [2] and [3] where a general approach is proposed based on Ba-
nach algebras of spatially decaying matrices to analyze the spatial structure of infinite and finite
horizon optimal controllers for spatially distributed systems with arbitrary spatial structures. In [2]
and [3], it is shown that quadratically optimal controllers inherit spatial decay properties of the un-
derlying dynamics of the systems. A basic fundamental property of a Banach algebra is that it is a
Banach space and locally convex. These nice properties allow us to apply existing methods in the
literature to study the class of spatially distributed systems over Banach algebras; for example see
[12, 13, 1, 2, 3, 5, 14, 16, 15].
    The main contribution of this paper is the development of a unified methodology to determine
the degrees of sparsity and spatial localization for a broad class of spatially distributed systems. We
categorize the largest classes of spatially distributed systems for which their corresponding quadrat-
ically optimal controllers inherent spatial decay property from the dynamics of their underlying sys-
tems. We introduce new classes of spatially decaying systems that are defined over q-Banach algebras
endowed with matrix q-norms, where q is an exponent strictly greater than 0 and less than or equal to
1. The class of spatially distributed systems considered in [3, 2] and [16] are special examples of our
new class of systems which correspond to exponent q = 1. When the exponent q is strictly less than
1, a q-Banach algebra becomes locally nonconvex and is not a Banach space. However, they exhibit
an interesting property: if q2 is less than q1 , then the space of linear systems over q1 -Banach algebra
is a subset of the space of linear systems defined over q2 -Banach algebra. This property implies that
when exponent q tends towards 0, the space of spatially decaying systems over the q-Banach algebra
starts to expand and cover larger classes of spatially distributed systems.
    The analysis and synthesis of optimal controllers for linear systems involves using inverse op-
eration of matrices or transfer matrices. In general, linear system analysis over the space of sparse
matrices is hopeless, in the sense that sparsity is not preserved under inverse operation. For exam-
ple, a Toeplitz band matrix belongs to the space of sparse matrices while its inverse may not live in
that space. Therefore, the space of sparse matrices is not inverse-closed. We establish a connection
between a notion of sparsity and the spatial decay property of the class of spatially decaying systems.
The bridge connecting these two fundamental notions is built upon the key idea of asymptotically
approximating the space of sparse matrices by inverse-closed q-Banach algebras for sufficiently small
values of q. We begin in section 2 by categorizing the class of admissible coupling weight functions
in order to model coupling structures in spatially distributed systems. In section 5, we introduce
the class of spatially decaying systems over the Gröchenig-Schur class of spatially decaying matrices,
which are examples of q-Banach algebras. The problem formulation is discussed in section 4, where
we define the LQR problem for the class of spatially decaying systems and assert that there is an in-
herent relationship between sparsity and spatial decay property of the LQR feedback controller. It
is argued in section 5 that it is necessary to study spatially distributed systems over q-Banach alge-
bras for the range of exponents 0 to 1 in order to exploit their sparsity features. Section 6 character-
izes various algebraic properties of q-Banach algebras and shows under some conditions q-Banach


                                                   3
algebras are inverse-closed. Furthermore, we show that proper q-Banach algebras enjoy spectral-
invariance property with respect to the space of bounded linear operators on ℓ2 (G). In section 7, we
show that characterization of exponential stability for linear systems over q-Banach algebras slightly
differs from the standard characterization and explicitly quantify the decay rate of the q-norm of the
C0 -semigroup. The main control-theoretic results of this paper are in sections 8 and 9 where we
prove that the unique solution of the Lyapunov equation for linear autonomous systems and Ric-
cati equation resulting from the LQR problems over a proper q-Banach algebra also belong to the
same q-Banach algebra. The significance of these results are discussed in section 10 and it is shown
that the underlying information structure of the LQR controller for a spatially decaying system is in-
herently spatially localized and each local controller needs to receive state information only from
some neighboring subsystems. Then, we characterize a fundamental limit that explains to what de-
gree a stabilizing controller with spatially decaying structure can be sparsified and spatially localized.
Moreover, we argue that a fundamental tradeoff emerges between a desired degree of sparsification
and localization and the global performance loss. A probabilistic method and a computational algo-
rithm is proposed in section 11 to analyze and compute near-optimal degrees of sparsity and spatial
localization for the Gröchenig-Schur class of spatially decaying matrices. We end in section 12 with a
discussion of related areas in which our methodology can be applied, as well as a discussion of some
open research problems.
Mathematical Notation. Throughout the paper, the underlying discrete spatial domain of a spatially
distributed system is denoted by G which is a subset of Zd for d ≥ 1. For a given discrete spatial
domain G, the ℓ0 –measure of a vector x = [xi ]i∈G is defined as
                                                    
                                   kxkℓ0 (G) := card xi 6= 0 i ∈ G ,                                   (1)

where card is the number of elements in a set. The value of the ℓ0 –measure represents the total
number of nonzero entries in a vector. The ℓq –measure of x is defined by

                                           kxkqℓq (G) =
                                                          X
                                                                |xi |q
                                                          i∈G


for all 0 < q < ∞, and
                                          kxkℓ∞ (G) = sup |xi |,
                                                          i∈G

for q = ∞. Whenever it is not ambiguous, we use the simplified notation kxkq for the ℓq –measure of
vector x.

Remark 1.1. The proof of all theorems, propositions, and lemmas in Sections 2 through 6 are given in
Appendix 13.




                                                     4
2    Admissible Coupling Weight Functions

The structure of couplings between subsystems in a spatially distributed linear systems can be mod-
eled using coupling weight functions. We consider the class of infinite-dimensional linear dynamical
networks whose coupling structures are spatially decaying. For this class of systems, the coupling
strength between subsystems decays by distance in the spatial domain G. We say that a function
ρ : G × G → R is a quasi-distance function on G if it satisfies the following properties:

(i) ρ(i, j) ≥ 0 for all i, j ∈ G;

(ii) ρ(i, j) = 0 if and only if i = j; and

(iii) ρ(i, j) = ρ(j, i) for all i, j ∈ G.

    A quasi-distance function is different from a distance function in that the triangle inequality is
not required to hold. In the case that G corresponds to an unweighted undirected graph of a sparsely
connected spatially distributed system, one may use the shortest distance on a graph to define the
quasi-distance ρ(i, j) from vertex i to vertex j. A coupling weight function is a positive function w that
is defined on G × G and satisfies the following properties:

(i) w(i, j) ≥ 1 for all i, j ∈ G;

(ii) w(i, j) = w(j, i) for all i, j ∈ G; and

(iii) supi∈G w(i, i) < ∞.

    In our framework, we are interested in coupling weight functions that are submultiplicative, i.e.,

                                                      w(i, j) ≤ w(i, k) w(k, j)                                     (2)

for all i, j, k ∈ G. Later on in our analysis, this property will help us to define matrix norms that enjoy
submultiplicative property. In order to develop a relevant matrix space to study the sparsity and
spatial localization in spatially distributed systems, we need to impose some additional technical
conditions on coupling weight functions that will guarantee certain growth rates for the coupling
weight functions.

Definition 2.1. Suppose that ρ : G × G 7−→ R is a quasi-distance function. A coupling weight
function w = [w(i, j)]i,j∈G is called admissible whenever there exist a companion weight function
u = [u(i, j)]i,j∈G , an exponent θ ∈ (0, 1), and a positive constant D such that

                             w(i, j) ≤ w(i, k) u(k, j) + u(i, k) w(k, j)                    for all i, j, k ∈ G,    (3)

and the following inequality
                                   X                          1− q                     u(i, j) q 
                                                           2q       2
                 sup        inf               |u(i, j)|   2−q           + t    sup                        ≤ Dt1−θ   (4)
                  i∈G       τ ≥0
                                     j∈G
                                                                                j∈G       w(i, j)
                                                                              ρ(i,j)≥τ
                                   ρ(i,j)<τ



                                                                        5
                                 1




                                0.5



                                      δ=0.1

                                          δ=0.5
                                                           δ=0.9
                                 0
                                 −5                                0                                 5



Figure 1. The decay rates of the inverse of the sub-exponential coupling weight function (6) with d = 1 and
σ = 1 are depicted for three different values of parameter δ.

holds for all t ≥ 1 when 0 < q ≤ 1, and
                               X                    1        X           q  q−1 
                                                  2
                                                       2             u(i, j) q−1 q
             sup        inf               |u(i, j)|        + t                           ≤ Dt1−θ           (5)
              i∈G       τ ≥0
                                 j∈G                             j∈G
                                                                     w(i, j)
                               ρ(i,j)<τ                         ρ(i,j)≥τ



holds for all t ≥ 1 when 1 < q ≤ ∞.

   We refer the reader to [22, P. 3102] for similar definitions on the admissibility of a weight function
for q ≥ 1. The following lemma characterizes two classes of most popular coupling weight functions
that appear in modeling of various real-world dynamical networks. We refer to Appendix 13.1 for the
proof, c.f. Example 2.2 in [22].

Lemma 2.1. Suppose that the quasi-distance function on Zd is defined by ρ(i, j) = ki − jk∞ . For
0 < q ≤ 1, the class of sub-exponential coupling weight functions
                                                                    ki−jk δ 
                                                                         ∞
                                      eσ,δ := eσ,δ (i, j) i,j∈Zd = e     σ
                                                                                                           (6)
                                                                                       i,j∈Zd


with parameters σ > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1), are submultiplicative and admissible with constants

                                                           dq             qδ(2 − 2δ )
                                          De = 2d+1− 2 ,        θe =                      ,
                                                                       qδ + d(1 − 2q )σ δ

and the class of polynomial coupling weight functions
                                                                                         α 
                                                                          1 + ki − jk∞
                               πα,σ := πα,σ (i, j) i,j∈Zd =                                                (7)
                                                                                  σ               i,j∈Zd




                                                                   6
with parameters α, σ > 0, are submultiplicative and admissible with constants
                                      n            q
                                                      o                                 qα
                        Dπ = 2qα+1 max 1, (2σ)d(1− 2 ) ,                   θπ =                    .
                                                                                   qα + d(1 − 2q )

    In real-world applications, the decay rate of the coupling coefficients in state space matrices de-
termines the type of a suitable coupling weight function for that specific dynamical network (see
Figures 6 and 7 for some examples).

Remark 2.1. A weak version of the submultiplicative property (2) can deduced from Definition 2.1 as
follows:
                             w(i, j) ≤ C0 w(i, k) w(k, j)              for all i, j, k ∈ G.
                    √
with constant C0 ≤ 2 q D. We refer to Appendix 13.2 for more details. We should also emphasize that
the class of weight functions that are considered in this section are more general than the class of weight
functions introduced earlier in [4, 22, 23].


3    The Class of Spatially Decaying Systems

We consider the class of infinite-dimensional linear systems whose dynamics are governed by

                                                  ẋ = Ax + Bu,                                                           (8)
                                                  y = Cx + Du,                                                            (9)

where it is assumed that all state-space matrices are constant by time and all relevant signals of the
system are indexed by a spatial coordinate in addition to time. The state, input and output vari-
ables are represented by infinite-dimensional vectors x = [xi ]i∈G , u = [ui ]i∈G , y = [yi ]i∈G , respec-
tively. The linear system (8)-(9) is defined on the state space ℓ2 (G). We are interested in a class of
infinite-dimensional linear systems (8)-(9) with the common property that there is a notion of spa-
tial distance with respect to which couplings between the subsystems can be quantified using a class
of coupling weight functions. This class of systems are so called spatially decaying systems and are
defined over the following general class of spatially decaying matrices.

Definition 3.1. For a given admissible coupling weight function w on G×G, the Gröchenig-Schur class
of infinite-dimensional matrices on G is denoted by Sq,w (G) and defined as
                                        n                                                    o
                              Sq,w (G) = A = [aij ]i,j∈G              kAkSq,w (G) < ∞                                    (10)

for 0 < q ≤ ∞, where the Sq,w –measure is defined by
                                 n         X                       1/q           X                       1/q o
            kAkSq,w (G) := max       sup         |aij |q w(i, j)q          , sup         |aij |q w(i, j)q            ,   (11)
                                     i∈G   j∈G                              j∈G    i∈G




                                                             7
                            1




                           0.5   α=0.5




                                    α=2       α=5
                            0
                            −5                        0                        5


Figure 2. The decay rates of the inverse of the polynomial coupling weight function (7) with d = 1 and σ = 1
are depicted for three different values of parameter α.

for all 0 < q < ∞, and
                                     kAkS∞,w (G) := sup |aij |w(i, j),                                 (12)
                                                     i,j∈G

for q = ∞.

   We should remark that this class of spatially decaying matrices was studied for q = 1 in [4, 3, 2],
for q = ∞ in [21], for 1 ≤ q ≤ ∞ in [23, 22], and the results of this paper extends this class of
matrices to include range of exponents 0 < q ≤ 1. When 0 < q < 1, the quantity (11) is so called a
q-norm and it is nonconvex as ℓq -measures are nonconvex for this range of exponents. Therefore, the
space of matrices Sq,w (G) is not locally convex and that is not a Banach space. In [5], we verified the
subalgebra properties of this class of matrices 0 < q ≤ 1. Whenever it is not ambiguous, for simplicity
of our notations we will employ Sq,w instead of Sq,w (G).

Definition 3.2. For a fixed exponent 0 < q ≤ ∞, a linear system (8)-(9) is called spatially decaying on
G with respect to an admissible coupling weight function w if A, B, C, D ∈ Sq,w (G).

   These are systems with off-diagonally decaying state-space matrices. This definition greatly gen-
eralizes the earlier works [2] and [3] that only studied the class of such systems for exponent q = 1.
For every exponent 0 < q < 1, the corresponding class of spatially decaying systems are defined
over a matrix space Sq,w (G) that is not a Banach space, which prevents us from employing existing
techniques in the literature that are based on continuous integrals on Banach spaces. Therefore, all
existing proof methods to study algebraic properties of linear systems cannot be directly applied for
systems that are defined over Sq,w (G) for 0 < q < 1. Our results in this paper significantly generalize
existing works in the literature to study structural properties of spatially decaying systems.

Remark 3.1. One of the interesting facts about the class of spatially decaying linear systems is that they
are closed under basic system operations such as series, parallel, and feedback interconnections. This
can be shown by applying the results of Theorems 6.1 and 6.2.

                                                     8
Remark 3.2. We should emphasize that the result of this paper in the following sections hold for all
exponents 0 < q ≤ ∞. Nevertheless, we will only focus on the class of spatially decaying matrices with
exponents 0 < q ≤ 1. Our method of analysis and all results can be modified accordingly to cover the
range of exponents 1 ≤ q ≤ ∞.


4    Problem Formulation

We formulate the problem of investigating the sparsity and spatial localization features of an infinite
horizon Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) problem for spatially decaying systems. The LQR problem
is defined as the problem of minimizing the quadratic cost functional
                                      Z ∞
                                             x(t)∗ Qx(t) + u(t)∗ Ru(t) dt
                                                                      
                                 J=                                                                 (13)
                                       0

subject to the dynamics (8)-(9) with initial condition x(0) = x0 ∈ ℓ2 (G). Our basic assumption is that
the linear system is spatially decaying and that all state-space matrices A, B, C, D as well as weight
matrices Q, R belong to Sq,w (G). There is a rich literature that consider this problem on Hilbert
spaces (see [18, 13] and references in there) and show that under some standard assumptions the
unique solution to this problem is achieved by a linear state feedback control law u = −Kx for which

                                             K = −R−1 B ∗ X,                                        (14)

where X is the unique solution of the following Riccati equation

                                  A∗ X + XA + Q − XBR−1 B ∗ X = 0.                                  (15)

    In spatially decaying systems, the internal states of the underlying system as well as control inputs
are distributed in the spatial domain. We assume that the dynamics of individual subsystems in the
spatially decaying system are heterogeneous and the spatial structure does not necessarily enjoy any
particular spatial symmetries. Therefore, standard tools such as Fourier analysis cannot be applied
to analyze this class of systems. In [3], the authors proposed an operator theoretic approach based
on the Banach algebras of spatially decaying matrices S1,w (G) to analyze the spatial structure of infi-
nite horizon optimal controllers for spatially distributed systems with arbitrary spatial structure and
showed that quadratically optimal controllers inherit spatial decay properties of the underlying sys-
                                                                                 
tems. The results of [3] and [16] state that the LQR feedback control law K = kij i,j∈G is spatially
localized, i.e.,
                                            |kij | ≤ C0 w(i, j)−1                                   (16)

where C0 = kKkS1,w (G) is a finite number. This implies that the underlying information structure
of the optimal control law is sparse and spatially localized on the spatial domain and each local
controller needs to receive state information only from some neighboring subsystems rather than
from the entire network.


                                                     9
    The Problem: The goal of this paper is to determine the degrees of sparsity and spatial localiza-
tion, i.e., the communication requirements for the controller array, for the optimal solution of the
LQR problem that is defined over a Sq,w (G) for 0 < q ≤ 1.
    Our primary focus is on revealing the fundamental role of underlying structure of spatially de-
caying system in showing that the corresponding LQR state feedback control law has an inherently
sparse and localized architecture in the spatial domain. This property can enable us to discover
fundamental tradeoffs between sparsity of the information structure in controller array and global
performance loss in a spatially decaying system by exploiting the spatial structure of the underlying
system. In the next section, it is discussed that in order to define a viable measure to quantify the
sparsity and spatial localization in spatially decaying systems one needs to study the LQR problem
over the Gröchenig-Schur class of matrices Sq,w (G) for 0 < q ≤ 1.


5    The Space of Sparse Matrices and Their Asymptotic Approximations
We establish a connection between sparsity and spatial decay features of spatially decaying systems
based on the fact that the endowed Sq,w –measures are indeed asymptotic approximations of an ideal
sparsity measure as exponent q tends to zero. This implies that the Gröchenig-Schur class of spa-
tially decaying matrices can be viewed as asymptotic relaxations of the space of sparse matrices. The
range of exponents 0 < q < 1 is extremely important for our development as we can asymptotically
quantify the sparsity and spatial localization properties of spatially decaying systems for sufficiently
small values of exponent q. This property comes at the expense of working in matrix spaces that are
not Banach spaces.
    For every infinite-dimensional vector x = [xi ]i∈G with bounded entries, the ℓq –measure approxi-
mates the ℓ0 –measure defined by (1) asymptotically, i.e.,

                                        lim kxkqℓq (G) = kxkℓ0 (G) .                                 (17)
                                        q→0


   This observation motivates us to consider asymptotic behavior of the Sq,w –measure as q tends to
zero in order to quantitatively identify near–sparse information structures with semi-decentralized
architectures for the optimal solution of the LQR problem for spatially decaying systems. For this
purpose, let us define an ideal sparsity measure, so called S0,1 –measure, for a matrix A = [aij ]i,j∈G by
                                                n                                      o
                           kAkS0,1 (G) := max       sup kai· kℓ0 (G) , sup ka·j kℓ0 (G) ,            (18)
                                                    i∈G              j∈G


where ai· is the i’th row and a·j is the j’th column of matrix A. The value of S0,1 –measure reflects the
maximum number of nonzero entries in all rows and columns of matrix A.

Theorem 5.1. For a given matrix A = [aij ]i,j∈G with finite S0,1 –measure and bounded entries, i.e.,
kAkS∞,w < ∞, we have
                                      lim kAkqSq,w (G) = kAkS0,1 (G) .                               (19)
                                      q→0



                                                          10
   The most important implication of this theorem is that small values of q (closer to zero) can
lead to reasonable approximations of the ideal sparsity measure for matrices. This is particularly
true for spatially decaying matrices with slowly decaying rates, such as polynomially decaying matri-
ces. However, for matrices with rapidly decaying rates, such as sub-exponentially decaying matrices,
larger values of q (closer to one) can also result in reasonable measures for sparsity. We discuss this
in Section 10.
   The proposed S0,1 –measure has an interesting interoperation when A is adjacency matrix of an
unweighted undirected graph. In this case, the value of S0,1 –measure is equal to the maximum node
degree in that graph. The sparsity S0,1 –measure has several advantages over the conventional spar-
sity measure
                                        X
                                                |aij |0 = card aij 6= 0 i, j ∈ G .
                                                              
                               kAk0 =                                                                   (20)
                                        i,j∈G

The value of the S0,1 –sparsity measure reveals some valuable information about sparsity as well as
spatial locality features of a given sparse matrix, while (20) does not enjoy this property. Moreover,
(20) does not exhibit any interesting algebraic property and may not be useful in infinite-dimensional
settings. Let us consider the set of all sparse matrices characterized by
                                               n                 o
                                     S0,1 (G) = A kAkS0,1 (G) < ∞ .                                     (21)

Proposition 5.1. The S0,1 –measure satisfies the following properties:

  (i) kαAkS0,1 (G) = kAkS0,1 (G) ;

 (ii) kA + BkS0,1 (G) ≤ kAkS0,1 (G) + kBkS0,1 (G) ; and

(iii) kABkS0,1 (G) ≤ kAkS0,1 (G) kBkS0,1 (G)

for all nonzero scalars α and matrices A, B ∈ S0,1 (G).

   Properties (i)-(iii) imply that the set S0,1 (G) is closed under addition and multiplication. One
of the fundamental properties of Sq,w (G) that is not inherited by S0,1 (G) is the inverse-closedness
property. For instance, a Toeplitz band matrix belongs to S0,1 (G) while its inverse may not live in
S0,1 (G). In fact, S0,1 (G) is not even an algebra. A formal definition of inverse-closedness is given in
Definition 6.5. We show that inverse-closedness property of matrix algebras plays a central role in
exploiting various structural properties of spatially distributed systems over such matrix algebras.

Remark 5.1. For large values of q (closer to ∞), Sq,w –measure asymptotically approximates S∞,w –
measure and its value measures degree of spatial localization. On the other end of the spectrum, Sq,w –
measure asymptotically approximates S0,1 –measure for small values of q (closer to 0). This observation
implies that in order to study sparsity features of spatially distributed systems it is necessary to consider
range of exponents q ≤ 1. A fundamental challenges emerges here as Sq,w is not a Banach space for
0 < q < 1. For mathematical purposes, q = 1 is the best possible choice as S1,w –measure is indeed
a norm and convex. More precisely, the matrix space S1,w (G) is the “minimal” Banach algebra (and


                                                         11
                                                                                          q
                    0                                  1



Figure 3. For 1 ≤ q ≤ ∞, Sq,w (G) is a Banach algebra. However, Sq,w (G) for 0 < q < 1 is not a Banach space.
The analysis of spatially distributed systems over Sq,w (G) for 0 < q ≤ 1 requires new and unconventional
techniques based on q-Banach algebras.

therefore, a Banach space) with respect to exponent q among all matrix spaces Sq,w (G) for 1 ≤ q ≤ ∞.
Furthermore, spatially decaying matrices in S1,w (G) enjoy the fastest decay rates among all families of
Gröchenig-Schur class of matrices for 0 < q ≤ 1. In Section 10, we propose a rigorous criterion and
an algorithm to compute an exponent 0 < q < 1 in order to Sq,w –measure to become a viable sparsity
measure.



6     Sparsity Through q-Banach Algebras
The basic properties of the Gröchenig-Schur class of spatially decaying matrices pave the way to ex-
tend our exploration to more abstract ground in order to capture fundamental properties of spatially
decaying systems. In this section, we develop a rigorous mathematical foundation based on the ab-
stract notion of q-Banach algebras for range of exponents 0 < q ≤ 1 that enables us to study the spar-
sity and spatial localization for a general class of spatially decaying systems. The Gröchenig-Schur
class of spatially decaying matrices for 0 < q ≤ 1 is an example of a q-Banach algebra.

Definition 6.1. For 0 < q ≤ 1, a complex vector space of matrices A is a q-Banach space equipped with
q-norm k · kA if it is complete with respect to the metric

                                          dA (A, B) := kA − BkqA

for A, B ∈ A and the q-norm satisfies

    (i) kAkA ≥ 0, and kAkA = 0 if and only if A = 0;

 (ii) kαAkA = |α| kAkA ; and

(iii) kA + BkqA ≤ kAkqA + kBkqA

for all A, B ∈ A and all α ∈ C.

     A q-Banach space A with q = 1 is a Banach space, while it is a quasi-Banach space for any 0 < q ≤
1, because
                         kA + BkA ≤ (kAkqA + kBkqA )1/q ≤ 21/q (kAkA + kBkA )

                                                     12
                                                                           P∞
for all A, B ∈ A. It is straightforward to verify that the series              n=1 un converges in the q-Banach
                       q
space A if ∞
            P
              n=1 kun kA < ∞.

Definition 6.2. For 0 < q ≤ 1, a q-Banach space A equipped with q-norm k · kA is a q-Banach algebra
if it contains a unit element I, i.e., M := kIkA < ∞, and there exists a constant K0 > 0 such that

 (iv) kABkA ≤ K0 kAkA kBkA for all A, B ∈ A.

   One can show that the submultiplicative property for a q-Banach algebra holds by rescaling the
q-norm as k · k∗A = K0 k · kA and get

                                kABk∗A ≤ kAk∗A kBk∗A ,     for all A, B ∈ A.

Definition 6.3. For a given exponent 0 < q ≤ 1 and a Banach algebra B, its q-Banach subalgebra A is
a differential Banach subalgebra of order θ ∈ (0, 1] if there exist a constant D > 0 such that its q-norm
satisfies the differential norm property
                                                                qθ                 qθ !
                                                          kAkB                 kBkB
                         kABkqA   ≤ D kAkqA kBkqA                      +
                                                          kAkA                 kBkA

for all A, B ∈ A.

   For a Banach subalgebra A (i.e., when q = 1), the above differential norm property with θ ∈
(0, 1] has been widely used in operator theory and noncommutative geometry [24, 25, 26], and in
solving (non)linear functional equations [28, 27]. The differential norm property plays a crucial role
in establishing inverse-closedness property for q-Banach algebra, identifying exponential stability
conditions, and exploiting algebraic properties of the unique solutions of Lyapunov and algebraic
Riccati equations over q-Banach algebras. One of the most interesting and practical examples of a
q-Banach algebra is Sq,w (G) for 0 < q ≤ 1. It turns out that the q-Banach algebra Sq,w (G) enjoys the
above differential norm property.

Definition 6.4. For 0 < q ≤ 1, a q-Banach algebra A of matrices on G equipped with q-norm k · kA is
said to be proper if it is a q-Banach algebra with the following additional properties:

(P1) A is closed under the complex conjugate operation, i.e., for all A ∈ A we have

                                                kA∗ kA = kAkA ;                                            (22)


(P2) A is a subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)) and continuously embedded with respect to it, i.e., for all A ∈ A we
      have
                                              kAkB(ℓ2 (G)) ≤ kAkA ;                                        (23)

(P3) A is a differential Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)) of order θ ∈ (0, 1].

   We should mention that under the assumption (23), a differential q-Banach subalgebra A ⊂
B(ℓ2 (G)) of order θ is also a differential q-Banach subalgebra A of order θ ′ ∈ (0, θ).

                                                    13
Theorem 6.1. For every 0 < q ≤ 1 and admissible coupling weight function w, the space of matrices
Sq,w (G) is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)).

    The proof of the above theorem is given in Appendix 13.4. For 0 < q < 1, the space of matrices
Sq,w (G) is not a Banach space, since the q-norm does not satisfy the triangle inequality.

Definition 6.5. A subalgebra A of a Banach algebra B is inverse-closed if A ∈ A and A−1 ∈ B implies
that A−1 ∈ A.

    As we discussed earlier in Section 5, the space of sparse matrices S0,1 (G) is not inverse-closed
in general. There are several families of Banach subalgebras of (infinite-dimensional) matrices with
some certain off-diagonal decay properties for which the inverse-closedness property, also known as
Wiener’s lemma, is inherited from the parent Banach algebra. We refer the reader to [29, 30, 31, 32, 4,
33, 34, 22, 23, 27] and the survey papers [35, 36], [37] for more details. It is known that under certain
assumptions on the weight function w the Gröchenig-Schur class of matrices Sq,w (G) for 1 ≤ q ≤
∞ is an inverse-closed Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)). The following new result shows that under
some mild assumptions q-Banach subalgebras of B(ℓ2 (G)) for 0 < q ≤ 1 inherit inverse-closedness
property from B(ℓ2 (G)).

Theorem 6.2. For 0 < q ≤ 1, suppose that A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)). Then A is
inverse-closed in B(ℓ2 (G)).

    Our proof of Theorem 6.2 in Appendix 13.5 is constructive and provides explicit estimates for
the q-norm of the inverse matrix A−1 . The results of Theorems 6.1 and 6.2 imply that Sq,w (G) for
0 < q ≤ 1 is inverse-closed in B(ℓ2 (G)). The last necessary piece to add to our toolbox is to establish
a relationship between the spectral set of a matrix with respect to B(ℓ2 (G)) and its proper q-Banach
subalgebras.

Theorem 6.3. For 0 < q ≤ 1, suppose that A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)). Then it
follows that
                                 σA (A) = σB(ℓ2 (G)) (A) for all A ∈ A,                             (24)

where the complement of the spectral set of A ∈ A is given by
                                  
                       C\σA (A) := λ ∈ C λI − A has bounded inverse in A .

    This spectral-invariance property will help us in the following sections to develop a general frame-
work to study the sparsity and spatial localization features of spatially distributed systems.


7    Exponential Stability over q-Banach Algebras

For the LQR problem in Section 4, one of the main requirements is that the optimal solution of the
LQR problem has to be exponentially stabilizing. Therefore, we need to revisit the notion of expo-
nential stability for linear systems over q-Banach algebras. It is said that a matrix A in a (q-)Banach

                                                   14
algebra A is exponentially stable if there exist strictly positive constants E and α such that

                                         ketA kA ≤ E e−αt for all t ≥ 0.                                    (25)

Then exponential stability of matrix A in a proper q-Banach subalgebra A of B(ℓ2 (G)) is equivalent
to its exponential stability in B(ℓ2 (G)). The necessity follows from the fact that A is continuously
imbedded in B(ℓ2 (G)). The sufficiency follows from the following theorem, which expresses this re-
lationship in more explicit form by characterizing decay rate of the q-norm of the strongly continuous
semigroup of A.

Theorem 7.1. Suppose that 0 < q ≤ 1 and A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)). If A ∈ A is
exponentially stable in B(ℓ2 (G)), i.e., there exist some constants E, α > 0 such that

                                              ketA kB(ℓ2 (G)) ≤ Ee−αt                                       (26)

for all t ≥ 0, then
                                                 ketA kqA ≤ C(t) e−αqt                                      (27)

for all t ≥ 0, where constants M, D, K0 , θ are defined in Definitions 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4,
                                                           ω(t)
                                   C(t) = M q Ξ0 eqE 2DE qθ       ,
                                          ∞
                                                                   !nq
                                          X    K0nq    kAkA
                                    Ξ0 =                               ,                                    (28)
                                               (n!)q kAkB(ℓ2 (G))
                                                  n=0

and                                                      log2 (2−θ)
                                        −1
                                (1 − θ) 2 t kAkB(ℓ2 (G))
                                                                     if θ ∈ (0, 1)
                      ω(t) =                                                                            .
                                                                            
                                          log2 1 + 2tkAkB(ℓ2 (G))                       if      θ=1
                               

Proof. For all t ∈ 0, kAk−1
                                 
                            2
                         B(ℓ (G))
                                    , we have

                                                  ∞  n
                                     q               t q
                                                                   kAn · IkqA
                                                  X
                                etA A ≤
                                                         n!
                                                 n=0
                                                        ∞
                                                                                              !nq
                                                    q
                                                        X K nq     0          kAkA
                                           ≤ M                                                      .       (29)
                                                        n=0
                                                            (n!)q           kAkB(ℓ2 (G))

The first inequality follows from the triangle inequality for k · kqA and the Taylor expansion etA =
P∞ tn An
  n=0 n! , and the second inequality holds due to the submultiplicative property (iv) in Definition
6.2. From this result, it follows that
                                                                           αq
                                             q                      kAk
                                         etA A ≤ M q Ξ0 e                 B(ℓ2 (G))   e−αqt                 (30)




                                                              15
for all t ∈ 0, kAk−1
                           
                  B(ℓ2 (G))
                              . From the following identity
                                                    Z ∞
                                         −1
                                         A    =−                etA dt in B(ℓ2 (G)),
                                                        0

Property (P2) in Definition 6.4 and the exponential stability assumption (26), one can conclude that
kA−1 kB(ℓ2 (G)) ≤ E
                  α . Thus, we get

                                     α                                E
                                                ≤                                              ≤ E.
                              kAkB(ℓ2 (G))          kA−1 kB(ℓ2 (G)) kAkB(ℓ2 (G))

This together with (30) implies that

                                                    q
                                              etA A ≤ M q Ξ0 eqE e−αqt                                  (31)

for all t ∈ 0, kAk−1          . For every t > kAk−1
                           
                  B(ℓ2 (G))                      B(ℓ2 (G))
                                                           , let denote m to be the smallest positive integer
such that
                                              2−m t ∈ 0, kAk−1
                                                                      
                                                            B(ℓ2 (G))
                                                                        ,

or equivalently,
                                     tkAkB(ℓ2 (G)) ≤ 2m < 2tkAkB(ℓ2 (G)) .                              (32)

By applying the differential norm property given in Definition 6.3 and the exponential stability as-
sumption (26) leads to

                                                            t     q(2−θ)      t
                              ketA kqA ≤ 2D ke 2 A kA                      ke 2 A kqθ
                                                                                   B(ℓ2 (G))
                                                                              t   q(2−θ)
                                             ≤ 2DE qθ e−qθαt/2 ke 2 A kA                   .            (33)

Then, it follows that
                                        1+(2−θ)    θ    2−θ       tA q(2−θ)2
                   ketA kqA ≤     2DE qθ          e− 2 (1+ 2 )qαt ke 4 kA
                            ≤ ···
                                      Pm−1
                                          j=0 (2−θ)
                                                    j
                                                            P
                                                               m−1 2−θ j
                                                                          
                                                       − 2θ    j=0 ( 2 )
                                                                                  tA q(2−θ)m
                              
                                   qθ                                      qαt
                            ≤  2DE                    e                        ke 2m kA
                                                  Pm−1j=0 (2−θ)
                                                                  j
                                 q    qE        qθ
                            ≤ M Ξ0 e       2DE                      e−qαt                               (34)

for all t ≥ kAk−1
               B(ℓ2 (G))
                         . In the above inequalities, the first three inequalities follow from applying (33)
repeatedly, and the last inequality hold by (31). This combines with (32) to show that the desired
exponential stability property (27) in A holds for all t ≥ 0.

   We should clarify that C(t) in the right hand side of (27) has a sub-exponential growth for 0 < θ <
1 and a polynomial growth for θ = 1. Thus, the right hand side of (27) vanishes exponentially as t
goes to infinity, which implies that A is exponentially stable in A.
   In the next step, we consider Lyapunov stability of linear systems that are defined over q-Banach

                                                                 16
algebras.


8    Lyapunov Equations over q-Banach Algebras

In this section, we study structural properties of solutions of Lyapunov equations for linear systems
over q-Banach algebras. Our goal is to determine degrees of sparsity and spatial localization for the
solution of the algebraic Lyapunov equation. We recall a well-known result about solving the alge-
braic Lyapunov equation in B(ℓ2 (G)); for more details see [39, P. 76] and [12, Theorem 1]. Suppose
that Q ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)) is strictly positive on ℓ2 (G), and A ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)) is exponentially stable on ℓ2 (G).
Then, there exists a unique strictly positive solution P in B(ℓ2 (G)) for the Lyapunov equation

                                               AP + P A∗ + Q = 0,                                  (35)

which has the following compact form
                                          Z ∞
                                                     ∗
                                   P =           etA Q etA dt in B(ℓ2 (G)).                        (36)
                                           0

    Our goal is to characterize sufficient conditions under which the unique solution of a Lyapunov
equation with coefficients in a q-Banach algebra A also belongs to A. Since A is not a Banach space
for 0 < q < 1, we cannot directly apply the explicit expression (36) to tackle this problem. The reason
is that continuous integrals, such as (36), cannot be defined properly on q-Banach algebras as it is not
                                                                                            
a Banach space. In order to overcome this challenge, first we introduce a series of matrices Pm m≥0
using the following iterative process

                                        A∗ kAk−1 2                 A kAk−1 2
                                Pm = e          B(ℓ (G))   Pm−1 e       B(ℓ (G))   + P0            (37)

for m ≥ 1, with initial value

                                       ∞ X
                                       X ∞           kAk−m−n−1
                                                        B(ℓ2 (G))
                                P0 =                                     (A∗ )m Q An .             (38)
                                                 (m + n + 1) m! n!
                                       n=0 m=0

Then we apply the result of Theorem 7.1 on exponential stability in a proper q-Banach algebra to
prove the convergence of the proposed iterative procedure in the q-Banach algebra. It can be shown
                                                                                          
that Pm ∈ A for all m ≥ 0 and that the series converges in A. In fact, the limit of series Pm m≥0 as m
tends to infinity converges to the unique solution of (35).

Theorem 8.1. For 0 < q ≤ 1, suppose that A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)). Assume that
Q ∈ A is strictly positive on ℓ2 (G) and that A ∈ A is exponentially stable on ℓ2 (G). Then, the unique
strictly positive solution of the Lyapunov equation (35) belongs to A. Moreover, we have the following
bound estimation
                                                                  kQkqA
                                         kP kqA ≤ Ξ20 Π0                                           (39)
                                                                kAkqB(ℓ2 (G))


                                                           17
where
                                                      ∞ 
                                                                                                            !
                                                                2ωk                           2αqk
                    Π0 = 1 + K02q M 2q Ξ20 e2qE
                                                      X
                                                         2DE qθ      exp −                                      ,
                                                                                             kAkB(ℓ2 (G))
                                                      k=1

in which constants E, α are defined in (26) and M, D, K0 , θ in Definitions 6.2–6.4, and
                                      
                                               −1   log (2−θ) if θ ∈ (0, 1)
                                       (1 − θ) (2k) 2
                                      
                               ωk =                                                                  .
                                      
                                                 log2 (1 + 2k)                  if    θ=1
                                      


Proof. For an exponentially stable matrix A ∈ A, let us consider P0 given by (38). Then P0 ∈ A and
its q-norm can be bounded from above as follows:
                                                                    !q
                                ∞           kAk−m−n−1
                                               B(ℓ2 )                                            q
                 kP0 kqA
                                X
                           ≤                                              (A∗ )m Q An A
                                          (m + n + 1) m! n!
                               m,n=0
                                                                         !q
                                   1
                                             ∞            kAk−m−n
                                                             B(ℓ2 )             q(m+n)
                                                                                         kA∗ kqm   qn   q
                                            X
                           ≤                                                  K0              A kAkA kQkA
                                kAkqB(ℓ2 ) m,n=0            m! n!
                                 kQkqA
                           =              Ξ2 < ∞.                                                                   (40)
                                kAkqB(ℓ2 ) 0

Since A is a subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)) by (23), P0 is a bounded operator on ℓ2 (G). Moreover, it follows
that
                                          Z kAk−1           ∞
                                                  B(ℓ2 )    X (tA∗ )m Q (tA)n
                               P0 =                                           dt
                                            0                       m! n!
                                                           m,n=0
                                          Z kAk−1
                                                  B(ℓ2 )     ∗
                                      =                    etA QetA dt          in   B(ℓ2 (G)).                     (41)
                                            0

This implies that P0 is strictly positive. Now, let us consider the iterative process (37) for all m ≥ 1
with initial value P0 . By induction,
                                                m
                                                X     kA∗ kAk−1 2             kAkAk−1 2
                                    Pm =              e          B(ℓ )   P0 e        B(ℓ )   ,                      (42)
                                                k=0

for all m ≥ 0. From (42) and the result of Theorem 7.1, we can obtain the following inequalities:
                                                                  2ωm          −1
                             q
                   Pm+1 − Pm A ≤ K02q M 2q Ξ20 e2qE kP0 kqA 2DE qθ      e−2qαmkAkA                                  (43)
                                                                           
for all m ≥ 1. This implies that Pm ∈ A for all m ≥ 0 and that the sequence Pm m≥0 converges in A.
                                         
We denote by P∞ the limit of sequence Pm m≥0 as m tends to infinity, i.e.,

                                                 P∞ = lim Pm ∈ A.
                                                           m→∞




                                                              18
From (41) and (42), it follows that
                                   Z (m+1)kAk−1
                                                 B(ℓ2 )         ∗
                            Pm =                             etA Q etA dt   in B(ℓ2 (G))
                                      0

for all m ≥ 0. This together with the exponential stability property (25) implies that the series Pm for
                        R∞    ∗
all m ≥ 1 converges to 0 etA QetA dt in B(ℓ2 (G)). Thus, it follows that
                                          Z ∞
                                                     ∗
                                                etA QetA dt = P∞ ∈ A.
                                          0

Therefore, the unique solution P∞ of the Lyapunov equation (35) belongs to A.

    The upper bound in (39) gives an estimate to what degree the unique solution of the Lyapunov
equation (35) can be sparsified and spatially localized. The result of this theorem can be particularly
used to study the problem of disturbance propagation is spatially decaying system. It turns out that
this problem boils down to evaluation of the corresponding controllability Gramian, which is the
solution of a Lyapunov equation. The recent work [40] studies this problem for the class of spatially
invariant systems over tori.


9    Riccati Equations over q-Banach Algebras
The main result of this paper is stated in this section where we consider solving algebraic Riccati
equations related to linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) problems over q-Banach algebras. The follow-
ing result is well-known and classic [18, 13]. Suppose that A, B, Q, R ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)) and operators Q and
R are positive and strictly positive on ℓ2 (G), respectively. If (A, B) is exponentially stabilizable and
(A, Q1/2 ) is exponentially detectable, then the Riccati equation

                                   A∗ X + XA − XBR−1 B ∗ X + Q = 0                                  (44)

has a unique strictly positive solution X ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)). Furthermore, the closed-loop matrix AX =
A + K is exponentially stable in B(ℓ2 (G)), where K is the LQR state feedback matrix given by

                                                K = −R−1 B ∗ X.                                     (45)

    For the closed-loop matrix AX = A − BR−1 B ∗ X there exist positive constants E and α such that

                                              etAX       B(ℓ2 (G))
                                                                     ≤ E e−αt                       (46)

for all t ≥ 0. Let Ω be the rectangle region in the complex plane with vertices

                                                         α
                                                 −            ± 2 kAX kB(ℓ2 (G)) i,                 (47)
                                                         2
                                −2 kAX kB(ℓ2 (G))) ± 2 kAX kB(ℓ2 (G))) i.                           (48)


                                                              19
The boundary of the rectangle region Ω is denoted by Γ. The following two lemmas are useful in the
proof of the main results in Theorems 9.1 and 9.2.

Lemma 9.1. Suppose that AX is exponentially stable in B(ℓ2 (G)) and (46) holds for some positive
constants E and α. Then,
                                                                     2E
                                       (zI − AX )−1 B(ℓ2 (G))) ≤                                   (49)
                                                                      α
and
                                                                         E
                                       (zI + AX )−1 B(ℓ2 (G))) ≤                                   (50)
                                                                         α
for all z ∈ Γ, where Γ is the boundary of the rectangle region Ω in the complex plane with vertices
(47)-(48).

Proof. Let us consider the rectangle region in the complex plane with vertices (47)-(48) and boundary
                              6 − α2 , we have that
Γ. For every z ∈ Γ with Re{z} =

                                          |z| ≥ 2kAX kB(ℓ2 (G))) .

This implies that zI − AX is invertible and

                                                                     E
                                       (zI − AX )−1 B(ℓ2 (G))) ≤       .                           (51)
                                                                     α

For every z ∈ Γ with Re{z} = − α2 , it follows that

                                                                     2E
                                       (zI − AX )−1 B(ℓ2 (G))) ≤        .                          (52)
                                                                      α

By combining inequalities (51) and (52), we get

                                                                     2E
                                       (zI − AX )−1 B(ℓ2 (G))) ≤                                   (53)
                                                                      α

for all z ∈ Γ. Through a similar argument, we can show that zI + A∗X is invertible for all z ∈ Γ and

                                                                         E
                                       (zI + A∗X )−1 B(ℓ2 (G))) ≤                                  (54)
                                                                         α

for all z ∈ Γ.

Lemma 9.2. For 0 < q ≤ 1, suppose that A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)), A, B, Q, R ∈
A, and Q and R are positive and strictly positive on ℓ2 (G), respectively. Assume that X is the solu-
tion of (44) and the corresponding closed-loop matrix AX is exponentially stable. Let us define the
Hamiltonian operator of the Riccati equation (44) by
                                            "                        #
                                                A     −BR−1 B ∗
                                       H=                                .                         (55)
                                                −Q         −A∗



                                                      20
If we define
                                                 1
                                                          Z
                                                                                    −1
                                           E :=                    zI2 − H                dz,       (56)
                                                2πi           Γ

then
                                                         E ∈ M2 (A),                                (57)

where M2 (A) is the algebra of 2 × 2 matrices with entries in A and is defined in Appendix 13.7. More-
over, we have                                        "                                    #
                                                           I − ZX                   Z
                                               E =                                                  (58)
                                                         X(I − ZX) XZ

for some operator Z ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)).

Proof. We denote the block identity matrix by
                                                              "             #
                                                                  I    0
                                                     I2 =                       .
                                                                  0 I

Through direct computations one can show that
                                                 "                                        #
                                                     zI − AX           BR−1 B ∗
                               zI2 − H = T                                                    T−1   (59)
                                                          0            zI + A∗X

where z ∈ Γ and                                             "               #
                                                                  I     0
                                                     T=                         .
                                                                  X I

The above identity together with (49) and (50) imply that zI2 − H is invertible in B(ℓ2 (G))) for all
z ∈ Γ. Therefore it follows from Theorem 6.2 and Lemma 13.1 that

                                                (zI2 − H)−1 ∈ M2 (A)                                (60)

for all z ∈ Γ. Let us define
                                                 1
                                                          Z
                                                                                    −1
                                           E :=                    zI2 − H                dz.       (61)
                                                2πi           Γ

For every given z0 ∈ Γ, we have
                                 −1                          −1
                                                              I2 − (z0 − z)(z0 I2 − H)−1
                                                                                         
                      zI2 − H              =    z0 I2 − H
                                                              ∞
                                                          −1 X                          n
                                           =    z0 I2 − H        (z0 − z)n (z0 I2 − H)−1 ,          (62)
                                                                      n=0

where the series converges in M2 (A) whenever
                                       1
                                   K0q |z − z0 | (z0 I2 − H)−1 M2 (A) < 1.




                                                                  21
This is because according to (120)
                                            n q                                                          nq
              (z0 − z)n (z0 I2 − H)−1               M2 (A)
                                                                  ≤ |z0 − z|qn K0n−1 (z0 I2 − H)−1 M2 (A) .             (63)

Since Γ is a compact set, there exists finitely many points zi for i = 1, . . . , N along with the four
vertices of the rectangle region such that the collection of balls B(zi , ri ) with centers zi with radii
                                                        1
                                                                                            −1
                                           1             q                    −1
                                      ri =          K0           (zi I2 − H)       M2 (A)
                                                                                                  ,
                                           2

for all i = 1, . . . , N , is a covering of the boundary Γ. Therefore, we can write

                             N Z
                             X
                    E =                    (zI2 − H)−1 dz
                             i=1      Γi
                              N                         ∞          Z                               n
                             X                      −1 X                          n
                        =             zi I2 − H                            (zi − z) dz   (zi I2 − H)−1 ,                (64)
                             i=1                             n=0      Γi


where
                                                     Γi ⊂ Γ ∩ B(zi , ri ),
                            
for all i = 1, . . . , N and Γi : i = 1, . . . , N are disjoint covering of the boundary Γ. According to (59),
(61) and (63), we conclude that
                                                             E ∈ M2 (A).                                                (65)

   From identity (59), it follows that
                                 "                                                                        #
                  1                  (zI − AX )−1 −(zI − AX )−1 BR−1 B ∗ (zI + A∗X )−1
                        Z
             E =             T                                                                                 T−1 dz   (66)
                 2πi     Γ                  0                                  (zI + A∗X )−1

belongs to B(ℓ2 (G))) by (49) and (50). Recall that Γ is the boundary of a rectangle region Ω such that
the spectrum of AX is contained in Ω and the closure of Ω is contained in the open left half plane.
Applying functional calculus to (66) leads to
                                            "                #            "                           #
                                                I Z                            I − ZX             Z
                             E = T                               T−1 =
                                                0    0                        X(I − ZX) XZ

for some operator Z ∈ B(ℓ2 (G))).

   From the result of Lemma 9.2, we can immediately conclude that

                                           I − ZX, Z, X(I − ZX), XZ ∈ A.                                                (67)

   Our goal is to prove that X ∈ A. As we discussed earlier, a q-Banach algebra for 0 < q < 1 is not
a Banach space. In the following two theorems, we apply Lemma 9.2 along with several technical as-



                                                                     22
sumptions and develop a constructive proof based on finite covering of compact sets to show that the
unique solution of an algebraic Riccati equation over a q-Banach algebra belongs to that q-Banach
algebra.

Theorem 9.1. For 0 < q ≤ 1, suppose that A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)), A, B, Q, R ∈
A, and Q and R are positive and strictly positive on ℓ2 (G), respectively. If we assume that (i) (A, B) is
exponentially stabilizable and (A, Q1/2 ) is exponentially detectable; and (ii) the dual Riccati equation

                                   AY + Y A∗ − Y QY + BR−1 B ∗ = 0                                   (68)

has a self-adjoint solution Y ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)) such that I + Y X is invertible in B(ℓ2 (G)), then the unique
positive definite solution of the Riccati equation satisfies X ∈ A and AX is exponentially stable on A.

Proof. We have HE = EH, where H and E are defined in the statement of Lemma 9.2. It is straight-
forward to verify that Z in (67) satisfies the Lypunov equation

                                      AX Z + ZA∗X + BR−1 B ∗ = 0.                                    (69)

From our assumption (ii) and exponential stability property of AX in B(ℓ2 ), the unique solution of
the Lyapunov equation (69) can be represented as (see [38, Lemma 4.9] for more details)

                                           Z = Y (I + XY )−1 ,                                       (70)

where Y = Y ∗ ∈ B(ℓ2 ) is a solution of the dual Riccati equation (68). From (70), we have

                                   I − ZX = I − Y (I + XY )−1 X
                                                = I − Y X(I + Y X)−1
                                                = (I + Y X)−1 .                                      (71)

According to our assumption (ii) and (71), it follows that I − ZX is invertible in B(ℓ2 (G)). From
(67) and the inverse-closedness property of the q-Banach algebra A given in Theorem 6.2, we can
conclude that (I − ZX)−1 ∈ A, which together with X(I − ZX) ∈ A in (67) proves X ∈ A. From the
closure properties of A, it also follows that

                                       AX = A − BR−1 B ∗ X ∈ A.

Since AX is exponentially stable on B(ℓ2 (G)), we can conclude from Theorem 7.1 that it is also expo-
nentially stable on A.

   One can relax the second condition in Theorem 9.1 by assuming that the linear system is approx-
imately controllable. The following definition is taken from [18, Definition 4.1.17].

Definition 9.1. The linear system (8) is approximately controllable if it is possible to steer from the
origin to within an ǫ–neighborhood from every point in ℓ2 (G) for every arbitrary ǫ > 0, i.e., if R the

                                                     23
reachable subspace of (A, B) is dense in ℓ2 (G), where
                         n                                                        o
                     R := z ∈ ℓ2 (G) ∃ T > 0, u ∈ L2 [0, T ]; ℓ2 (G) s.t. z = BT u ,
                                                                    


and the controllability operator of (A, B) is defined by
                                          Z T
                                 T
                               B u :=           eA(T −τ ) Bu(τ )dτ in B(ℓ2 (G)).
                                           0

Theorem 9.2. For 0 < q ≤ 1, suppose that A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)), A, B, Q, R ∈
A, and Q and R are positive and strictly positive on ℓ2 (G), respectively. If we assume that (A, B) is
approximately controllable and (A, Q1/2 ) is exponentially detectable, then the unique positive definite
solution of the Riccati equation satisfies X ∈ A and AX is exponentially stable on A.

Proof. According to [18, Definition 4.1.17] and Definition 9.1, we can also rewrite the reachable sub-
space of (A, B) as
                                                      [
                                                R=           R(BT ),                               (72)
                                                      T >0

where R(.) is the range of an operator. From [18, Lemma 4.1.6], it follows that

                                     R(BT ) = R(BTK ) for all T > 0,                               (73)

where BTK is the controllability operator of (A+BK, B). From (72) and (73), we can conclude that the
reachable subspace of (A, B) is equal to (A + BK, B) for any bounded feedback K. Therefore, (A, B)
is approximately controllable if and only if (A + BK, B) is for any bounded feedback K. This implies
that (AX , B) is also approximately controllable. We have HE = EH, where H and E are defined in
the statement of Lemma 9.2. The matrix Z in (67) satisfies the Lyapunov equation (69). As AX is
exponentially stable in B(ℓ2 ), it follows that
                                       Z ∞
                                                d  tAX A∗ 
                            Z = −                  e   Ze X dt
                                                dt
                                       Z0 ∞
                                                               ∗
                                         etAX AX Z + ZA∗X etAX dt
                                                           
                                = −
                                  Z ∞0
                                                        ∗
                                =      etAX BR−1 B ∗ etAX dt in B(ℓ2 (G)).
                                      0

   Since (AX , B) is approximately controllable, according to [18, Theorem 4.1.22] we can conclude
that Z is the unique strictly positive solution of (69). In the next step, we prove that Z belongs to
the q-Banach algebra A. According to Lemma 9.2, we have E ∈ M2 (A). From this result and (58), it
immediately follows that
                                                   Z, XZ ∈ A.                                      (74)

Since Z is strictly positive, we get that Z −1 ∈ A by the inverse-closedness of the q-Banach algebra A.
This together with (74) prove that the solution X of the algebraic Riccati equation (44) belongs to A.


                                                        24
Based on a similar argument in the proof of Theorem 9.1, we can conclude that AX is exponentially
stable on A.

     We remark that the result of Theorem 9.2 does not require the existence of a solution of the cor-
responding filter Riccati equation.

Corollary 9.1. Suppose that the assumptions of Theorem 9.1 or Theorem 9.2 hold. Then, the LQR state
feedback gain (45) belongs to A.

Proof. According to Theorem 9.1 or Theorem 9.2, X ∈ A. Since A is closed under matrix multiplica-
tion and taking inverse, it follows that K = −R−1 B ∗ X ∈ A.

Remark 9.1. The proof of Theorem 9.1 is constructive which enables us to obtain an upper bound for
the q-norm of X over each covering set. By combining these upper bounds, one can only calculate a
conservative upper bound for the q-norm of X. For this reason, we do not present this conservative
upper bound.

Remark 9.2. The conclusions in Theorems 8.1 and 9.1 hold for Sq,w (G) for all 0 < q ≤ 1. For 1 ≤ q ≤ ∞,
Sq,w (G) is a Banach algebra. Our proof does not depend on whether the underlying space is a Banach
space or not. Therefore, our proofs are still valid for all exponents 0 < q ≤ ∞.

Remark 9.3. Our proposed methodology in this paper can be applied to analyze other optimal control
design problems with quadratic performance criteria, such as H2 and H∞ problems [18]. The solutions
of these optimal control problems usually involve solving two operator Riccati equations.


10     Fundamental Limits on the Best Achievable Degrees of Sparsity and
       Spatial Localization

The results of Theorem 6.1 and Corollary 9.1 imply that the LQR state feedback gain satisfies

                                      K ∈ Sq,w (G) for all 0 < q ≤ 1.

This result states that the LQR state feedback gain K = [Kij ]i,j∈G is spatially localized, i.e.,

                                           |Kij | ≤ C0 w(i, j)−1 ,                                  (75)

where C0 = kKkSq,w (G) is a finite number. This also asserts that the underlying information structure
of the optimal control law is sparse in space and each local controller needs to receive information
only from some neighboring subsystems. In the rest of this section in order to present our results in
more explicit and sensible forms, we will limit our analysis to matrices that are defined on G = Z
endowed with quasi-distance function ρ(i, j) = |i − j|.
   In order to characterize a fundamental limits on interplay between stability margins and optimal
performance loss in spatially distributed systems, we approximate the corresponding LQR feedback


                                                     25
gain K by a sparse feedback gain K T for a given truncation length T > 0 as follows
                                                         (
                                        T
                                                            Kij         if |i − j| ≤ T
                                    K           ij
                                                     =                                          .                         (76)
                                                                 0       if |i − j| > T

Theorem 10.1. For 0 < q ≤ 1, suppose that K ∈ Sq,w (Z) and K T is defined by (76). Then,

                                    kK − K T kB(ℓ2 (Z)) ≤ C0 w(T)−1                                                       (77)

where C0 = kKkSq,w (Z) and w(T) = inf |i−j|>T w(i, j).

Proof. We apply the Schur test to estimate the operator norm in B(ℓ2 (Z)), i.e.,
                                                X                                            X                    
           kK − K T k2B(ℓ2 (Z)) ≤       sup              Kij − (K T )ij                  sup        Kij − (K T )ij    .
                                        i∈Z j∈Z                                          j∈Z i∈Z


First, let us consider the following term
                           X                                                   X
                     sup       Kij − (K T )ij                = sup                   Kij
                     i∈Z j∈Z                                         i∈Z
                                                                           |i−j|>T
                                                                               X
                                                             = sup                   Kij w(i, j)w(i, j)−1
                                                                     i∈Z
                                                                           |i−j|>T
                                                                               X                   
                                                             ≤           sup             Kij w(i, j) w(T)−1
                                                                         i∈Z
                                                                               |i−j|>T

                                                             ≤ C0 w(T)−1 .                                                (78)

The last inequality holds due to the monotonic inequality

                                                         kzk1 ≤ kzkq

for all z ∈ ℓq (Z) and 0 < q ≤ 1. Likewise, by interchanging indices i and j a similar bound can be
obtained. Therefore, it concludes that

                                    kK − K T kB(ℓ2 (Z)) ≤ C0 w(T)−1 .




   For the class of sub-exponential coupling weight functions with parameters σ > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1),
the inequality (77) becomes
                                                                                          T δ
                                    kK − K T kB(ℓ2 (Z)) ≤ Ce e−( σ ) ,

where Ce = kKkSq,eσ,δ (Z) . Similarly, the error bound for the class polynomial coupling weight func-




                                                                     26
tions with parameters α, σ > 0 is
                                                            −α
                                              T             T
                                    kK − K kB(ℓ2 (Z)) ≤ Cπ       ,
                                                            σ

where Cπ = kKkSq,πα,σ (Z) .
  The inequality (77) in Theorem 10.1 implies that for spatially decaying state feedback gains, the
truncation tail K − K T can be made arbitrarily small as T gets large. This property enables us to
characterize stabilizing truncated state feedback gains by using small-gain stability argument. Let us
consider the truncated closed-loop system

                                           ẋ = (A − BK T )x.                                       (79)

One can decompose this system as two subsystems

                                        ẋ = (A − BK)x + w,                                         (80)
                                                                 T
                                       w = B(K − K )x.                                              (81)

Since K is the LQR feedback gain, the LQR closed-loop operator A − BK in (80) is exponentially
stable. If B ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)), we can apply small-gain theorem and characterize a fundamental limit in
the form of a lower bound for stabilizing truncation lengths for different admissible coupling weight
functions. For the class of sub-exponential coupling weight functions with parameters σ > 0 and δ ∈
(0, 1), the truncated feedback gain K T is exponentially stabilizing if the truncation length T satisfies
the following inequality
                                                      T > Ts ,                                      (82)

where
                                                                                  !1
                                                                                       δ

                           Ts = σ   log Ce kBkB(ℓ2 (Z)) sup σmax (G(s))                             (83)
                                                             Re(s)>0

and G(s) = (sI − (A − BK))−1 is the transfer function of the closed-loop system. The stabilizing
truncation length for the class of polynomial coupling weight functions with parameters α, σ > 0 is
given by
                                                                             !1
                                                                                 α

                            Ts = σ Cπ kBkB(ℓ2 (Z)) sup σmax (G(s))                   .
                                                          Re(s)>0

   A fundamental tradeoff emerges between truncation length and performance loss. Let us con-
sider the following quadratic cost functional
                                              Z ∞
                                J(x0 , K) =           (x∗ Qx + x∗ K ∗ RKx) dt,                      (84)
                                                  0

where x0 is the initial condition of the linear system and K an exponentially stabilizing state feedback




                                                        27
gain. It is straightforward to show that

                                                J(x0 , K) = x∗0 Xx0 ,                                      (85)

in which X is the unique strictly positive definite solution of the Lyapunov equation

                            (A − BK)∗ X + X(A − BK) + Q + K ∗ RK = 0.                                      (86)

     We define the performance loss measure by the following quantity

                                    ΠK (T, x0 ) = J(x0 , K T ) − J(x0 , K).                                (87)

One of the important remaining problems is to study the asymptotic behavior of the performance
loss ΠK (T, x0 ) as T tends to infinity. This problem is out of scope of this paper and will be addresses
in our future works.


11     Near-Optimal Degrees of Sparsity and Spatial Localization
In the next step, our goal is to propose a method to compute a value for parameter 0 < q < 1 such that
Sq,w –measure approximates S0,1 –measure in probability. In this subsection in order to present our
results in more explicit and sensible forms, we will limit our analysis to the class of sub-exponentially
decaying matrices that are defined on G = Z.

Definition 11.1. For a given truncation threshold ǫ > 0 and matrix K, the threshold matrix of K is
denoted by Kǫ and defined by setting (Kǫ )ij = 0 if |Kij | < ǫ and (Kǫ )ij = Kij otherwise.

     In order to present our results in more explicit and sensible forms, only in this section, we limit
our focus to the class of sub-exponentially decaying random matrices of the form
                                      (                                  δ                         )
                                                                   |i−j|
                                                           −
                         Rσ,δ (Z) =       K = rij e                  σ
                                                                                          rij ∼ U(−1, 1)
                                                                                  i,j∈Z


for some given parameters σ > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1). The coefficients rij are drawn from the continuous
uniform distribution U(−1, 1). It is assumed that the underlying spatial domain is Z and that the
spatial distance between node i and j is measured by |i − j|. The corresponding admissible coupling
weight function for this class of spatially decaying matrices is given by
                                                                       |i−j| δ 
                                                            
                                eσ′ ,δ   := e  σ′ ,δ   (i, j) i,j∈Z = e σ′                                 (88)
                                                                                              i,j∈Z


for some σ ′ > σ.

Definition 11.2. For a given truncation threshold 0 < ǫ < 1, the sparsity indicator function for the



                                                                   28
class of random sub-exponentially decaying matrices Rσ,δ (Z) is defined by

                                                              kKkqSq,w
                                       ΨK,w (q, ǫ) :=        √
                                                              δ
                                                                         ,                                  (89)
                                                           2 σ ln ǫ−1 + 1

where ⌊.⌋ is the floor function.

   The sparsity indicator function provides a reasonable criterion for calculating proper values for
exponent q and parameters in the weight function in order to measure sparsity of matrices in Rσ,δ (Z)
using Sq,w –measure. This is simply because of the following inequality that shows that the value of
the S0,1 –measure of the threshold matrix of a matrix K ∈ Rσ,δ (Z) can be upper bounded by
                                                      √
                                                       δ      
                                        kKǫ kS0,1 ≤ 2 σ ln ǫ−1 + 1.                                          (90)

Theorem 11.1. Suppose that w0 ≡ 1 is the trivial weight function and parameters σ > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1)
are given. Let us define parameter β = q ln ǫ−1 . For every K ∈ Rσ,δ (Z), the sparsity indicator function
ΨK,w0 (q, ǫ) converges to γ := β −s Γ(s + 1) in probability as the truncation threshold ǫ tends to zero, i.e.,
                                             n                            o
                                     lim P       ΨK,w0 (q, ǫ) − γ < ǫ0            = 1                        (91)
                                   ǫ→0+
                                                  R ∞ s−1 −t
for every ǫ0 > 0, where s = δ−1 and Γ(s) :=        0 t   e dt is the Gamma function.

Proof. The exponent q > 0 can be related to another auxiliary variable β > 0 using the following
equation
                                                      ǫq = e−β ,                                             (92)

from which we get β = q ln ǫ−1 . For every K ∈ Rσ,δ (Z), one can verify that

                                                1                k δ
                                                            e−q| σ |
                                                       X
                     ΨK,w0 (q, ǫ) ≤       √δ
                                                  
                                        2 σ ln ǫ−1 + 1 k∈Z
                                              √
                                              δ
                                                                                 δ
                                           2σ ln ǫ−1        1        X −β √
                                                                          δ
                                                                            k

                                   =      √δ
                                                        √δ
                                                                      e σ ln ǫ−1
                                                                                   .                         (93)
                                        2 σ ln ǫ−1 + 1 2σ ln ǫ−1 k∈Z

It is straightforward to show that
                                                    √δ
                                                 2σ ln ǫ−1
                                          lim  √              = 1,                                          (94)
                                          ǫ→0 2 σ δ ln ǫ−1 + 1
                                                          


and
                                             δ
                                 k                        Z ∞                     Z ∞
                  1     X −β √                        1              δ        1               1
                                                                e−β|t| dt =             e−βu u δ −1 du = γ
                               δ
                √
                δ
                            e σ ln ǫ−1           −→                                                          (95)
              2σ ln ǫ−1 k∈Z                           2   −∞                  δ    0




                                                           29
as ǫ → 0. Thus,                                                 Z ∞
                                                                                δ
                                   lim ΨK,w0 (q, ǫ) ≤                    e−β|t| dt = γ.                 (96)
                                   ǫ→0                           0

On the other hand, the expected value of the sparsity indicator function is lower bounded as follows

                                                     1        X 
                                                                            q
                                                                               −q |0−k|δ
                      E ΨK,w0 (q, ǫ) ≥             √
                                                    δ
                                                                   E |r0j |   e     σδ
                                                 2 σ ln ǫ−1 + 1 k∈Z
                                                                                                    δ
                                                                               k
                                                   1           1        X −β √
                                                                             δ
                                         =               √              e  σ ln ǫ−1 .
                                                 1 + q 2 σ δ ln ǫ−1 + 1
                                                                   
                                                                                        k∈Z


From (94) and (95), we have that
                                                                 Z ∞
                                                                                    δ
                                                                             e−β|t| dt = γ.
                                                
                               lim E ΨK,w0 (q, ǫ) ≥                                                     (97)
                               ǫ→0                                   0

In (97), if we keep the auxiliary parameter β fixed, then q → 0 whenever ǫ → 0. The two inequalities
in limits (96) and (97) prove (91) which shows the convergence of the sparsity indicator function
ΨK,w0 (q, ǫ) in probability.

   The result of Theorem 11.1 asserts that the sparsity indicator functions associated with the class
of sub-exponentially decaying random matrices Rσ,δ (Z) can be made arbitrarily close to a number
close to one (i.e., γ = 1 or β = Γ( 1+δ δ
                                     δ ) ) in probability when we use trivial weight function w0 (with
constant value 1). It turns out that one can select the exponent q and the nontrivial weight function w
simultaneously to measure sparsity using the weighted Sq,w –measure with guaranteed convergence
properties.

Corollary 11.1. Consider the coupling weight function (88) with parameter σ ′ = ση for some η, δ ∈
(0, 1) and σ > 0. Let us define parameter β = q ln ǫ−1 . Then, for every K ∈ Rσ,δ (Z) we have
                                             n                                          o
                                lim P            ΨK,eσ′,δ (q, ǫ) − γ ′ < ǫ0                  = 1,       (98)
                               ǫ→0+

where                                                                              
                                         ′              δ   1    1           1+δ
                                      γ := (1 − η ) β Γ     δ    δ                       .
                                                                              δ
Remark 11.1. Similar results can be obtained for polynomial weight functions.

    Algorithm for computing a near-optimal value for exponent q: There is an inherent algorithm
in the result of Theorem 11.1 that provides us with a roadmap to compute a near-ideal truncation
length for a given spatially decaying matrix. Suppose that we are given a sub-exponentialy decaying
random matrices in Rσ,δ (Z). For a given truncation length T ≥ 1, one can compute a conservative
value for parameter ǫ using the following equation

                                                                 T δ
                                                      ǫ = e−( σ ) .                                     (99)



                                                            30
By fixing the value of parameter β, one can compute a corresponding exponent q using the value of ǫ
from (99) as well as parameter γ. Knowing all these parameters enable us to compute the value of the
sparsity indicator function using its definition in (89). An iterative procedure can be used to obtain
the corresponding values of the sparsity indicator function for all values of T ≥ 1 by repeating the
above mentioned steps. Let us denote by Tnear-ideal the value of the truncation length beyond which
the value of the sparsity indicator function converges to a number close to γ with an acceptable error
bound. The existence of such a truncation length for a given matrix in Rσ,δ (Z) implies that there
exists an exponent 0 < qnear-ideal < 1 such that the Sq,w –measure of the matrix converges to a number
close to one in probability for all 0 < q < qnear-ideal . According to fundamental limit (82), a near-
optimal truncation length for a given matrix in Rσ,δ (Z) should satisfy the following inequality
                                                     
                                  Tnear-optimal ≥ max Ts , Tnear-ideal .                           (100)

where Ts is given by (83).


12     Discussion and Conclusion

12.1 Finite-Dimensional Spatially Distributed Systems

One can lift finite-dimensional spatially decaying systems to infinite-dimensional spatially decaying
systems by defining an extension of a finite-dimensional matrix to an infinite-dimensional matrix.
Suppose that A, B, C, D ∈ Rn×n are state-space matrices of a linear time-invariant system and Q, R ∈
Rn×n are the weight matrices in the LQR problem. The infinite-dimensional extension of a matrix can
be defined using the following operation:
                                   "      # "      # "     # "     #
                                     A 0      B 0      C 0     D 0
                    A, B, C, D 7−→         ,        ,       ,        ,
                                     0 −I      0 I     0 I     0 I
                              "      # "     #
                                 Q 0     R 0
                    Q, R 7−→          ,        ,
                                 0 I     0 I

where I and 0 are the identity and zero operators in B(ℓ2 (G)). The lifted operators have specific block
diagonal structures which enable us to show that the unique solution of the corresponding Lyapunov
equation (35) takes the following block diagonal form
                                              "              #
                                                   P    0
                                                        1
                                                                 ,                                 (101)
                                                   0    2I

where P is the solution of the corresponding finite-dimensional Lyapunov equation. The unique
solution of the corresponding algebraic Riccati equation (44) admits the following block diagonal
form                                           "             #
                                                   X 0
                                                                 ,                                 (102)
                                                   0    I


                                                       31
where X is the unique solution of the corresponding finite-dimensional Riccati equation. Therefore,
the results of Sections 9 and 8 can be applied to the lifted finite-dimensional linear systems. Due to
the specific block structures of solutions (101) and (102), one cannot obtain accurate spatial decay
rates for these solution based on our present results. However, extensive simulation results suggest
that similar sparsity and spatial localization properties should hold for finite-dimensional spatially
decaying systems.


12.2 Spatial Truncation and Performance Bounds

Our proposed methodology in this paper provides quantitative measures to determine degree of
sparsity and spatial localization for a large class of spatially decaying systems and their LQR feed-
back controllers. This information necessitates development of algorithmic methods to construct
localized models with quantitative estimates, localized feedback control laws with quantitative per-
formance bounds, and feedback control laws with sparse information structures. In Section 10, we
showed that for a given LQR feedback controller there exist a class of spatially localized feedback
controllers that can be calculated by direct spatial truncation of the LQR solution. One remaining
important problem is to investigate the asymptotic behavior of the performance index ΠK (T, x0 ) as T
tends to infinity. Moreover, it is an interesting and open question to apply finite-section approxima-
tion techniques [41] in order to reduce the control design complexity and quantify the convergence
rate of the finite-section approximations for spatially decaying systems.


12.3 Optimization and Regularization To Promote Sparsity

The inherent spatial decay property of the solution of LQR problem for spatially decaying systems
suggests that searching for sparse linear-quadratic state feedback controllers should naturally have
lower computational complexity compared to general spatially distributed systems. Our analysis
in Section 11 provides a pathway to quantify what degrees of sparsity and spatial localization one
should expect by solving S0,1 /Sq,w – regularization methods (for 0 < q ≤ 1) in order to design near-
optimal sparse state feedback controllers. The Sq,w -regularized optimal control problems (for 0 <
q < 1) are much more broadly applicable with respect to ℓ1 -based relaxations, which results in S1,w -
regularized optimal control problem. The reason is that the Gröchenig-Schur class of matrices enjoys
the following fundamental inclusion property:

                                         Sq1 ,w (G) ⊂ Sq2 ,w (G)

for all 0 < q2 < q1 ≤ ∞. This implies that the space of spatially decaying systems over Sq,w (G) for
0 < q < 1 is larger than the space of spatially decaying system over S1,w (G), which was originally
studied in [3, 2].




                                                   32
12.4 Receding Horizon Control with State and Input Constraints

The machinery developed in this paper can be used to analyze the spatial structure of a broader
range of optimal control problems such as constrained finite horizon control (also known as Model
Predictive Control). In [2], the problem of constrained finite horizon control for the class of discrete-
time spatially decaying systems over Sq,w (G) was considered. The results of this paper along with the
techniques developed in [2] can be applied to study sparsity and localization properties of the class
of multi-parametric quadratic programming problems over q-Banach algebras.


12.5 Systems Governed by Partial Differential Equations

A natural generalization of the present results is to study spatial localization of feedback control laws
for linear systems that are defined using differential operators/pseudodifferential operators/integral
operators. The LQR problem for this class of systems involve state space and weight matrices A, B, Q, R
whose elements are differential operators/pseudodifferential operators/integral operators. A special
class of such systems includes translation invariant operators, such as partial differential operators
with constant coefficients, spatial shift operators, spatial convolution operators, or a linear combina-
tion of several of such operators [11], or general pseudodifferential operator and integral operators
[9, 10]. In general, some of the operators may be unbounded, so the notion of a solution for the
PDE system requires some deep mathematics, such as theory of operator semigroups, theory of dis-
tributions, and theory of Fourier integral operators [18, 19]. For translation invariant systems, the
feedback control law has the spatial convolution form. The main idea is to exploit spatial invariance
property of such systems by taking a spatial Fourier transform and study the diagonalized form (in
the Fourier domain) of the corresponding LQR problem [1, 20]. The Fourier approach is only appli-
cable to the class of spatially invariant systems. To generalize the present results, one would need
to develop suitable operator algebras in order to quantify the sparsity and spatial localization for the
class of PDE system, this is beyond the scope of this paper and be discussed in our future works.


12.6 Nonlinear Spatially Decaying Systems

The notion of spatial decay can be extended to study spatially distributed systems with nonlinear
dynamics. Let us consider an infinite-dimensional nonlinear system of the form

                                              ẋ = f (x, u)                                        (103)

where x, u ∈ ℓ2 (G) and f : ℓ2 (G) × ℓ2 (G) → ℓ2 (G). It is assumed that a suitable notion of a solution
exists for this system. We say that system (103) is spatially decaying if f has continuous bounded
gradients ∇x f (with respect to x) and ∇u f (with respect to u) on a q-Banach algebra for 0 < q ≤ ∞.
This is a natural extension in order to develop a theory for analysis of nonlinear spatially distributed
systems including quantification of the sparsity and spatial localization measures for nonlinear net-
works and approximation techniques. As part of this theory, one of the fundamental issues to address
is the inverse-closedness property of nonlinear maps. In [27], it shown that under some conditions

                                                   33
the inverse-closedness property holds for some class of nonlinear functionals over some inverse-
closed Banach algebras.


13       Appendix

13.1 Proof of Lemma 2.1

The class of sub-exponentially decaying coupling weight functions is the most suitable class of cou-
pling weight functions to study sparsity features of spatially decaying matrices. For the sub-exponential
coupling weight function eσ,δ , one can conclude from the following inequality

                                         (1 + t)δ ≤ 1 + (2δ − 1)tδ ≤ 1 + tδ for all t ∈ [0, 1]
                                                                                                    p
that eσ,δ is submultiplicative and that another sub-exponential weight function eσ′ ,δ with σ ′ = σ/ δ (2δ − 1)
can be adopted as its companion weight [22, Example A.3]. Furthermore, the second inequality in
Definition 2.1 holds with constants De and θe , because
     (                                                                 q )
                              2q 1− 2q               e  ′ ,δ (i − j)
       X                                            
                                                        σ
inf            eσ′ ,δ (i − j) 2−q        + t sup
τ ≥0                                         |i−j|≥τ   eσ,δ (i − j)
       |i−j|<τ
                (                                                                                 )
                                               X 1− q
                                                                2
          ≤ inf exp (2δ − 1)qσ −δ τ δ                              + t exp − (2 − 2δ )qσ −δ τ δ
                                                                                               
                                                       1
              τ ≥0
                                                               |i−j|<τ
                                     (                                                                                        )
                d(1− q2 )
                                                                       q     
                                                   (2δ − 1)qσ −δ + d(1 − )δ−1 τ δ + t exp − (2 − 2δ )qσ −δ τ δ
                                                                                                               
           ≤ 2              inf          exp
                            τ ≥0                                        2
                                       qδ(2−2δ )
               d+1− dq          1−           q
                                     qδ+d(1− 2 )σ δ
           ≤2        2      t                         .

Next, we consider the class of polynomial coupling weight functions. This class of coupling weight
functions are submultiplicative, i.e.,

                                                          πα,σ (i, j) ≤ πα,σ (i, k) πα,σ (k, j)

for all i, j, k ∈ Zd . It is straightforward to verify that

                                                   πα,σ (i, j) ≤ 2α πα,σ (i, k) + πα,σ (k, j)
                                                                                             


for all i, j, k ∈ Zd . Thus, the constant weight function uα,σ := uα,σ (i, j) i,j∈Zd with uα,σ (i, j) = 2α
                                                                            

can be used as a companion weight of the polynomial coupling weight function πα,σ . Moreover, the
second inequality in Definition 2.1 holds with constants Dπ and θπ , because
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                  q 
                             2q 1− 2q                                                                              1− q
                                                                    
       X                                                              u(i, j)                          X             2
                                                                                                                                 τ  −qα 
inf                uα (i, j) 2−q        + t sup                                          ≤ 2qα inf                  1      + t 1+
τ ≥0                                                     |i−j|≥τ       w(i, j)               τ ≥0                              σ       
         |i−j|<τ                                                                                          |i−j|<τ



                                                                              34
                                                                                               n               o 1−  qα
                                                                                                            q             q
                                                                                    ≤ 2qα+1 max 1, (2σ)d(1− 2 ) t qα+d(1− 2 ) .


13.2 Weak Submultiplicative Property Resulting from Definition 2.1

Suppose that w is a weight that satisfies the inequalities in Definition 2.1. For 0 < q ≤ 1, we get
                                   q                                             q                               q !
                          u(i, j)                                         u(i, j)                          u(i, j)
               sup                          ≤     inf       sup                           + sup
               j∈G        w(i, j)                 τ ≥0       j∈G          w(i, j)             j∈G          w(i, j)
                                                           ρ(i,j)<τ                         ρ(i,j)≥τ

                                                                                          1− q                                q !
                                                           X                        2q       2                       u(i, j)
                                            ≤     inf                   |u(i, j)|   2−q           + sup
                                                  τ ≥0
                                                               j∈G
                                                                                                         j∈G          w(i, j)
                                                                                                       ρ(i,j)≥τ
                                                             ρ(i,j)<τ

                                            ≤ D          for all i ∈ G.

The second inequality holds as w(i, j) ≥ 1 for i, j ∈ G and the last inequality follows by applying the
second inequality in Definition 2.1 with t = 1. The above estimate for the weight w and its companion
weight u along with property (3) prove the following weak version of the submultiplicative property
(2):
                                     w(i, j) ≤ C0 w(i, k) w(k, j)                   for all i, j, k ∈ G.
                    √
with constant C0 ≤ 2 q D. We refer the reader to [23, 22] for similar arguments for 1 < q ≤ ∞.


13.3 Proof of Theorem 5.1

According to the definition of S0,1 -measure, there exist i0 and j0 ∈ G such that
                                                          
                                         kAkS0,1 (G) = max kai0 · kℓ0 (G) , ka·j0 kℓ0 (G) .                                                    (104)

Then, from (17) and (104) it follows that
            nX                              X                           o
                   |ai0 j |q w(i0 , j)q ,         |aij0 |q w(i, j0 )q
                                                                                 
  lim max                                                                   = max kai0 · kℓ0 (G) , ka·j0 kℓ0 (G)                = kAkS0,1 (G) . (105)
  q→0
             j∈G                            i∈G


One observes that
                   nX                                                           o
                                                                                    ≤ kAkqSq,w (G) ≤ M q kAkS0,1 (G) ,
                                                    X
            max            |ai0 j |q w(i0 , j)q ,         |aij0 |q w(i, j0 )q                                                                  (106)
                     j∈G                            i∈G


where M = supi,j∈G |aij |w(i, j) < ∞ by the assumption on bounded entries. Letting q → 0 in (106)
and applying (105), we establish the limit (19).


13.4 Proof of Theorem 6.1

First, we show that Sq,w (G) is a q-Banach algebra. It is straightforward to verify properties (i) and
(ii) in Definition 6.1. Therefore, we only need to prove properties (iii) and (iv) in Definitions 6.1 and


                                                                          35
6.2. For every pair of arbitrary matrices A = [aij ]i,j∈G and B = [bij ]i,j∈G in Sq,w (G), we write their
summation by D = A + B where D = [dij ]i,j∈G . Then,
                               X                                       X                 
                         sup       |dij |q w(i, j)q       ≤ sup          |aij |p + |bij |q w(i, j)q
                         i∈G j∈G                                i∈G j∈G

                                                          ≤ kAkqSq,w + kBkqSq,w .                               (107)

The first inequality holds due to the well-known inequality (α + β)q ≤ αq + β q for all nonnegative
numbers α and β. In a similar manner, one can easily verify that

                                            |dij |q w(i, j)q ≤ kAkqSq,w + kBkqSq,w .
                                       X
                                 sup                                                                            (108)
                                 j∈G i∈G


Inequalities (107) and (108) imply that the q-norm is q-subadditive and that Sq,w –measure satisfies
property (iii).
   To prove property (iv), if the product of A and B is denoted by C = AB where C = [cij ]i,j∈G , then
we have
                             X                                     X
                       sup       |cij |q w(i, j)q     ≤ sup                 |aik |q w(i, k)q |bkj |q w(k, j)q
                       i∈G j∈G                              i∈G j,k∈G

                                                      ≤      kAkqSq,w kBkqSq,w .                                (109)

The first inequality uses the submultiplicative property (2) for the coupling weight function w and
the following monotonic inequality
                                                           kzk1 ≤ kzkq                                          (110)

for all z ∈ ℓq (G) and 0 < q ≤ 1. Through similar proof steps, one can verify that

                                                     q
                                                          w(i, j)q ≤ kAkqSq,w kBkqSq,w .
                                        X
                                  sup          cij                                                              (111)
                                   j∈G i∈G


From inequalities (109) and (111), we conclude that the q-norm is submultiplicative.
   In the next step, we prove that Sq,w (G) is a proper q-Banach algebra. It is straightforward to verify
property (P1). We prove a more general form of property (P2). For every matrix A = [aij ]i,j∈G in
Sq,w (G), the following inequality holds for all 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞,
                                                            n         X                   X         o
                               kAkB(ℓp (G)) ≤ max               sup         |aij |, sup       |aij | .
                                                                i∈G j∈G            j∈G i∈G


More details about this inequality can be found in [22, Theorem 2.4]. On the other hand, we have the
following inequality

                               X                          X                1/q
                        sup        |aij | ≤ sup                   |aij |q
                        i∈G j∈G                     i∈G     j∈G




                                                                  36
                                                               X                           1/q
                                                   ≤ sup                 |aij |q w(i, j)q            ≤ kAkSq,w ,
                                                         i∈G       j∈G


where the first inequality follows from (110) and the second inequality holds because of property (i)
of a coupling weight function. Similarly, one can verify that

                                      X                         X                          1/q
                                sup        |aij | ≤ sup                  |aij |q w(i, j)q            ≤ kAkSq,w .
                                j∈G i∈G                  i∈G       j∈G


From the above three inequalities, we can conclude that

                                                      kAkB(ℓp (G)) ≤ kAkSq,w (G)

for all A ∈ Sq,w (G). This implies that Sq,w (G) is continuously embedded in B(ℓp (G)) for all 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞.
Therefore, inequality (23) holds when p = 2. We should mention that the main idea of this part of our
proof stems from the arguments presented in references [4] and [22].
   Finally, we verify the differential norm property for Sq,w (G). For q = 1, Sq,w (G) has the differential
norm property, we refer to [22] for a proof. Therefore from now on we suppose that 0 < q < 1. For
every A = [aij ]i,j∈G and B = [bij ]i,j∈G in Sq,w (G), let us denote C = AB where C = [cij ]i,j∈G . From
property (3), it follows that
         X                                  X                                                               X
   sup       |cij |q w(i, j)q    ≤ sup              |aik |q |bkj |q w(i, k)q u(k, j)q + sup                     |aik |q |bkj |q u(i, k)q w(k, j)q
   i∈G j∈G                             i∈G j,k∈G                                                  i∈G j,k∈G

                                 ≤ kAkqSq,w sup                |bkj |q u(k, j)q + kBkqSq,w sup
                                                        X                                                   X
                                                                                                                |aik |q u(i, k)q .
                                                   k∈G j∈G                                         i∈G k∈G


In the following, we obtain upper bounds for each term in the right hand side of the last above in-
equality. Let us first consider
                                                                              !
      X                                               X              X
               q         q
sup       |bkj | u(k, j)        = sup inf                      +                  |bkj |q u(k, j)q
k∈G j∈G                               k∈G τ ≥0        j∈G            j∈G
                                                    ρ(k,j)<τ       ρ(k,j)≥τ
                                       (                      !q                                 !1− q                                             q )
                                                               2                                        2                            
                                                                                            2q                                           u(k, j)
                                                                                                            + kBkqSq,w sup
                                            X                          X
                      ≤ sup inf                     |bkj |2                    |u(k, j)|   2−q
                           k∈G τ ≥0          j∈G                       j∈G
                                                                                                                          j∈G            w(k, j)
                                                                                                                        ρ(k,j)≥τ
                                           ρ(k,j)<τ                  ρ(k,j)<τ
                                            (                                                   !1− q                                              q )
                                                                                                    2                                
                                                                                           2q                                            u(k, j)
                                                 kBkqB(ℓ2 )                                             + kBkqSq,w
                                                                    X
                             ≤ sup inf                                        |u(k, j)|   2−q                             sup
                                 k∈G τ ≥0                            j∈G
                                                                                                                          j∈G            w(k, j)
                                                                                                                        ρ(k,j)≥τ
                                                                   ρ(k,j)<τ

                                                          q(1−θ)
                                ≤ D kBkqθ
                                       B(ℓ2 )
                                              kBkSq,w .                                                                                            (112)

In the last two inequalities, we apply the Hölder’s inequality, inequalities in Definition 2.1 with t =




                                                                         37
kBkqSq,w
kBkq
            ≥ 1, and the following inequality
   B(ℓ2 )

                         X                      X
                                   |bkj |2 ≤          |bkj |2 = kB ∗ ek k22 ≤ kB ∗ k2B(ℓ2 ) = kBk2B(ℓ2 ) ,
                          j∈G                   j∈G
                        ρ(k,j)<τ



where ek = [δkj ]j∈G is the k’th standard Euclidean basis. In a similar manner, we can show that
                                    X
                             sup         |aik |q u(i, k) ≤
                             i∈G k∈G
                                         (
                                                             X                     2q    1− q
                                               kAkqB(ℓ2 )
                                                                                               2
                             sup inf                                   (u(i, k)) 2−q               +
                             i∈G τ ≥0                         k∈G
                                                            ρ(i,k)<τ
                                                                                                       q )
                                                                                              u(i, k)
                                                                 kAkqSq,w sup
                                                                                 k∈G          w(i, k)
                                                                               ρ(i,k)>τ




                                                            q(1−θ)
                                   ≤ D kAkqθ
                                          B(ℓ2 )
                                                 kAkSq,w .                                                                 (113)

By combining inequalities (112) and (113), we get

                                        |cij |q w(i, j)q ≤ D kAkqSq,w kBkqSq,w ×
                                    X
                            sup
                            i∈G j∈G
                                                                 qθ                       qθ !
                                                     kAkB(ℓ2 )                 kBkB(ℓ2 )
                                                                          
                                                                       +                            .
                                                     kAkSq,w                   kBkSq,w

Using a similar argument along with property (ii) as in Definition 2.1 for a weight function, i.e., sym-
metry, we get

                                        |cij |q w(i, j)q ≤ D kAkqSq,w kBkqSq,w ×
                                    X
                            sup
                            j∈G i∈G
                                                                 qθ                       qθ !
                                                     kAkB(ℓ2 )                 kBkB(ℓ2 )
                                                                          
                                                                       +                            .
                                                     kAkSq,w                   kBkSq,w

Therefore, we can conclude that
                                                                                    qθ                        qθ !
                                                                       kAkB(ℓ2 )                   kBkB(ℓ2 )
                                                                                              
                      kABkqSq,w ≤ DkAkqSq,w kBkqSq,w                                       +                           .
                                                                       kAkSq,w                     kBkSq,w




                                                                  38
13.5    Proof of Theorem 6.2
                                    PN         j
                                                                                  
For every n ≥ 1, let us write n =      j=0 ǫj 2 with ǫN = 1 and ǫj ∈                  0, 1 for 0 ≤ j ≤ N − 1. For a given
A ∈ A, by performing induction on the differential norm property we obtain

                      kAn kqA ≤ K0qǫ0 kAkqǫ 0
                                         A kA
                                              n−ǫ0 q
                                                  kA
                                                               (n−ǫ )qθ/2                      q(2−θ)
                                            qǫ0
                               ≤ 2DK0qǫ0 kAkA   kAkB(ℓ2 )0                  kA(n−ǫ0 )/2 kA
                               ≤ ···                                                                                       (114)
                                                                 PN−1         j
                                            PN−1
                                              j=0 (2−θ)
                                                       j     q    j=0 ǫj (2−θ)
                               ≤       2D                   K0                 ×
                                                                 !q PN
                                                                     j=0 ǫj (2−θ)
                                                                                 j
                                                     kAkA
                                                                                        kAkqn
                                                                                           B(ℓ2 )
                                                    kAkB(ℓ2 )
                                  q (1−θ)−1 nlog2 (2−θ)
                          
                          
                          
                            2DK  0                      kAkqn
                                                            B(ℓ2 )
                                                                   ×
                                         2−θ log2 (2−θ)
                          
                                     q 1−θ n
                              kAkA
                          
                          
                               kAkB(ℓ2 )                       if 0 < θ < 1,
                      ≤                                                                                                    (115)
                          
                          
                          
                                               q log2 n+q
                          
                               q log2 n
                          
                                            kAkA
                                                             kAkqn
                          
                           2DK0
                          
                                           kAk 2                B(ℓ2 )
                                                                                          if     θ = 1,
                                                    B(ℓ )



where D, K0 , θ are the positive constants in Definitions 6.2–6.4 (cf. [34] and [27]). We will use this
result in the following proof steps. For a given matrix A ∈ A with A−1 ∈ B(ℓ2 (G)), let us define

                                              B = I − kAk−2
                                                         B(ℓ2 )
                                                                A∗ A.

It is straightforward to verify that
                                           0  B  r0 I,                                    (116)
                                      −2 
where r0 = 1 − kA−1 kB(ℓ2 ) kAkB(ℓ2 )
                                               
                                         ∈ 0, 1 . When r0 = 0, the conclusion follows immediately
as in this case we have A−1 = kA−1 k−2
                                    B(ℓ2 )
                                           A∗ . Thus from now on, we assume that r0 ∈ (0, 1). We apply
properties of k · kA in Definitions 6.1, 6.2 and 6.4, and we get

                                   kBkqA ≤ kIkqA + kAk−2q
                                                      B(ℓ2 )
                                                             kA∗ AkqA
                                              ≤ M q + K0q kAk−2q
                                                             B(ℓ2 )
                                                                    kAk2q
                                                                       A.                                                  (117)

For θ ∈ (0, 1), this together with (116) and inequality (115) leads to

                                                                                      !q 2−θ nlog2 (2−θ)
                                                                                         1−θ
                               q (1−θ)−1 nlog2 (2−θ)                    kBkA
           kB n kqA ≤     2DK0                          kBkqn
                                                           B(ℓ2 )       kBkB(ℓ2 )
                                                                                                          2−θ log2 (2−θ)
                                                                                                              n
                                                                 M q + K0q kAk−2q    kAk2q
                                                                                                        ! 1−θ
                               q (1−θ)−1 nlog2 (2−θ)                         B(ℓ2 )    A
                     ≤    2DK0                          r0qn
                                                                                r0q




                                                            39
for all n ≥ 1. Similarly for θ = 1,
                                                                                         !log2 n+1
                                         log2 n qn        M q + K0q kAk−2q
                                                                        B(ℓ2 )
                                                                               kAk2q
                                                                                  A
                   kB n kqA   ≤    2DK0q        r0
                                                                          r0q

for n ≥ 1. Therefore I − B is invertible in A, and
                                                              ∞
                                                q
                                                                    kB n kqA < ∞
                                                              X
                                      (I − B)−1 A      ≤
                                                              n=1

as r0 ∈ (0, 1) and θ ∈ (0, 1]. We recall the matrix identity

                              A−1 = (A∗ A)−1 A∗ = kAk−2
                                                     B(ℓ2 )
                                                            (I − B)−1 A∗ .

From this, we can conclude that A is invertible in A.


13.6 Proof of Theorem 6.3

The inclusion σA (A) ⊂ σB(ℓ2 (G)) (A) follows directly from the result of Theorem 6.2, while the reverse
inclusion σB(ℓ2 (G)) (A) ⊂ σA (A) holds by continuous imbedding of A in B(ℓ2 (G)).


13.7 q-Banach Algebras of Block Matrices

For a given proper q-Banach subalgebra A of B(ℓ2 (G)), let us define an algebra of n × n matrices with
entries in A by                           n                         o
                                  Mn (A) = A := [aij ] kAkMn (A) < ∞ ,                               (118)

where                                                                         !1/q
                                                           n
                                                                   kaij kqA
                                                           X
                                      kAkMn (A) =                                    .               (119)
                                                           i,j=1

Lemma 13.1. For 0 < q ≤ 1, let us assume that A is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G)). Then,
the algebra Mn (A) is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G × . . . × G)).

Proof. By (118) and (119), one may verify that the quasi-norm k · kMn (A) satisfies the first three re-
quirements in Definition 6.2 for a q-Banach algebra. Given A := [aij ] and B := [bij ] in Mn (A), one
may verify that
                                                      n        n
                                                                                q
                                  kABkqMn (A) ≤
                                                      X        X
                                                                     aik bkj
                                                                      A
                                                      i,j=1k=1
                                               ≤      K0 kAkqMn (A) kBkqMn (A) ,                     (120)

where K0 is the constant in the definition of the q-Banach algebra A. Therefore Mn (A) equipped
with q-norm k · kMn (A) is a q-Banach algebra. The q-Banach algebra Mn (A) is closed under the


                                                        40
complex conjugate operation by (22) and (119). For every matrix

                                                       A := [aij ] ∈ Mn (A)

and x = [x1 , . . . , xn ] with x1 , . . . , xn ∈ ℓ2 (G) and

                                             kx1 k2ℓ2 (G) + . . . + kxn k2ℓ2 (G) ≤ 1,

we obtain that
                                                           n n
                                   2
                                                           X X                  2
                             Ax ℓ2 (G×...×G) =                         aij xj
                                                                                ℓ2 (G)
                                                           i=1 j=1
                                                           Xn Xn                                    2
                                                       ≤               kaij kB(ℓ2 (G)) kxj kℓ2 (G)
                                                           i=1 j=1
                                                           Xn Xn                      
                                                       ≤               kaij k2B(ℓ2 (G)) ≤ kAk2Mn (A) ,
                                                           i=1   j=1


where the last inequality follows from (23) and (119). Thus the q-Banach algebra Mn (A) is a subal-
gebra of B(ℓ2 (G × . . . × G)) and continuously embedded w.r.t. it, and

                                              kAkB(ℓ2 (G×...×G)) ≤ kAkMn (A)

for all A ∈ Mn (A). The q-Banach algebra Mn (A) is a differential subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G × . . . × G))
because for any A := [aij ] and B := [bij ] in Mn (A), we get that

                            n      n
                                                   q
     kABkqMn (A)
                            X      X
                      ≤                  aik bkj
                                                   A
                           i,j=1   k=1
                                n                                                         !
                                                 kaik kB(ℓ2 (G)) qθ       kbkj kB(ℓ2 (G)) qθ
                                                                      
                                       kaik kqA kbkj kqA
                                X
                      ≤ D                                             +
                                                    kaik kA                  kbkj kA
                          i,j,k=1
                                                                          qθ                           qθ !
                                                    kAk                            kBk
                                                  
                                                         B(ℓ 2 (G×...×G))               B(ℓ 2 (G×...×G))
                      ≤ nD kAkqMn (A) kBkqMn (A)                             +                                 .
                                                        kAkMn (A)                      kBkMn (A)

From this, one can conclude that Mn (A) is a proper q-Banach subalgebra of B(ℓ2 (G × . . . × G)).




                                                                 41
References

 [1] B. Bamieh, F. Paganini, and M. A. Dahleh. “Distributed control of spatially-invariant systems,”
     IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1091-1107, July 2002.

 [2] N. Motee and A. Jadbabaie, “Distributed multi-parametric quadratic programming,” IEEE Trans.
     Autom. Control, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 2279-2289, Oct. 2009.

 [3] N. Motee and A. Jadbabaie, “Optimal control of spatially distributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Au-
     tom. Control, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1616-1629, Aug. 2008.

 [4] K. Gröchenig and M. Leinert, “Symmetry of matrix algebras and symbolic calculus for infinite
     matrices,” Trans, Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 358, no. 6, pp. 2695-2711, 2006.

 [5] N. Motee and Q. Sun, “Measuring sparsity in spatially interconnected systems,” in Proc. IEEE
     52nd Annual Conf. Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 1520–1525, Firenze, Italy, Dec. 2013.

 [6] S. Smale and F. Cucker, “Emergent Behavior in Flocks,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 52, no.
     5, pp. 852-862, May 2007.

 [7] D.T. Neilson, “MEMS subsystems for optical networking,” Proceedings of 8th Microoptics Con-
     ference (MOC 01), Osaka, Japan.

 [8] M. Napoli, B. Bamieh, M. and Dahleh, “Optimal control of arrays of microcantilevers,” Trans-
     actions of the ASME. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement and Control, vol. 121, no. 4,
     pp.686–690, 1999.

 [9] F. Treves, “Introduction to Pseudodifferential and Fourier Integral Operators: Pseudodifferential
     operations (Vol. 1),” Plenum Press, 1980.

[10] K. Gröchenig, “Foundations of Time-Frequency Analysis,” Birkhäuser, 2001.

[11] L. Hörmander, “The Analysis of Linear Partial Differential Operators: Volumes 1–4,” Springer-
     Verlag, 1983.

[12] J. W. Bunce, “Stabilizability of linear systems defined over C ∗ -algebras,” Math. Systems Theory,
     vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 237-250, 1985.

[13] A. Bensoussan, G. Da Prato, M.C. Delfour, and S.K. Mitter, Representation and control of infinite
     dimensional systems, Birkhäuser Boston, vol. 2, 1993.

[14] A. Böttcher, “The algebraic Riccati equation with Toeplitz matrices as coefficients,” Electronic J.
     Linear Algebra, vol. 22, pp. 348-362, 2011.

[15] R. Curtain, “Corrections to “Riccati Equations on Noncommutative Banach Algebras”,” SIAM J.
     Control Optimiz., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 3351–3354, 2013.



                                                   42
[16] R. Curtain, “Riccati Equations on Noncommutative Banach Algebras,” SIAM J. Control Optim.,
     vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2542–2557, 2011.

[17] R.F. Curtain, “Comments on “optimal control of spatially distributed systems” N. Motee and A.
     Jadbabaie.” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1616-1629, 2008.

[18] R.F. Curtain and H.J. Zwart, “An introduction to infinite-dimensional linear systems theory,”
     Springer, vol. 21, 1995.

[19] I. M. Gelfands, “Generalized functions, Volumes 1–5,” Academic Press, 1964–1966.

[20] R. Curtain and A. Sasane, “On Riccati equations in Banach algebras,” SIAM Journal on Control
     and Optim., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 464-475, 2011.

[21] S. Jaffard, “Properiétés des matrices bien localisées prés de leur diagonale et quelques applica-
     tions,” Ann. Inst. Henri Poincaré, vol. 7, pp. 461-476, 1990.

[22] Q. Sun, “Wiener’s lemma for infinite matrices,” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 359, no. 7, pp. 3099-
     3123, 2007.

[23] Q. Sun, “Wiener’s lemma for infinite matrices II,” Constr. Approx., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 209-235,
     2011.

[24] B. Blackadar and J. Cuntz, “Differential Banach algebra norms and smooth subalgebras of C ∗ -
     algebras,” J. Operator Theory, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 255-282, 1991.

[25] E. Kissin and V. S. Shulman, “Differential properties of some dense subalgebras of C ∗ -algebras,”
     in Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 399–422, 1994.

[26] M. A. Rieffel, “Leibniz seminorms for matrix algebras converge to the sphere.” In Quanta of
     Maths, volume 11 of Clay Math. Proc., Amer. Math. Soc., pp. 543-578, 2010.

[27] Q. Sun, “Localized nonlinear functional equations and two sampling problems in signal pro-
     cessing,” Adv. Comput. Math., vol. 40, pp. 415–458, 2014.

[28] Q. Sun, “Nonuniform average sampling and reconstruction of signals with finite rate of innova-
     tion,” SIAM J. Math. Anal., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 1389-1422, 2006.

[29] R. Balan, “The noncommutative Wiener lemma, linear independence, and special properties
     of the algebra of time-frequency shift operators,” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 360, no. 7, pp.
     3921-3941, 2008.

[30] A. G. Baskakov, “Wiener’s theorem and asymptotic estimates for elements of inverse matrices,”
     Funct. Anal. Appl., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 222-224, 1990.

[31] K. Gröchenig and A. Klotz, “Noncommutative approximation: inverse-closed subalgebras and
     off-diagonal decay of matrices,” Constr. Approx., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 429-466, 2010.


                                                    43
[32] K. Gröchenig and M. Leinert, “Wiener’s lemma for twisted convolution and Gabor frames,” J.
     Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1-18, 2003.

[33] C. E. Shin and Q. Sun, “Stability of localized operators,” J. Funct. Anal., vol. 256, no. 8, pp. 2417-
     2439, 2009.

[34] Q. Sun, “Wiener’s lemma for infinite matrices with polynomial off-diagonal decay,” Comptes
     Rendus Mathematique, vol. 340, no. 8, pp. 567-570, 2005.

[35] K. Gröchenig, “Wiener’s lemma: theme and variations, an introduction to spectral invariance
     and its applications,” In Four Short Courses on Harmonic Analysis, Birkhäuser Boston, pp. 175-
     234, 2010.

[36] I. Krishtal, “Wiener’s lemma: pictures at exhibition,” Revista Union Matematica Argentina, vol.
     52, pp. 61-79, 2011.

[37] C.E. Shin and Q. Sun, “Wiener’s lemma: localization and various approaches,” Appl. Math. J.
     Chinese Univ., vol. 28, pp. 465-484, 2013.

[38] R.F. Curtain and M.R. Opmeer, “Normalized doubly coprime factorizations for infinite-
     dimensional linear systems,” Mathematics of Control, Signals and Systems, vol. 18, issue 1, pp.
     1-31, Feb. 2006.

[39] S. Barnett and C. Storey, Matrix Methods in Stability Theory, Barnes and Noble, New York, 1970.

[40] B. Bamieh, M. Jovanović, P. Mitra, and S. Patterson, “Coherence in large-scale networks:
     Dimension-dependent limitations of local feedback,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 57, no. 9,
     pp. 2235-2249, 2012.

[41] K. Gröchenig, Z. Rzeszotnik, and T. Strohmer, “Convergence analysis of the finite section
     method and Banach algebras of matrices,” Integral Equations and Operator Theory, vol. 67, no.
     2, pp. 183-202, 2010.




                                                    44
