  Correctness of belief propagation in Gaussian
     graphical models of arbitrary topology


                Yair Weiss                            William T. Freeman
        Computer Science Division                Mitsubishi Electric Research Lab
        UC Berkeley, 485 Soda Hall                        201 Broadway
         Berkeley, CA 94720-1776                     Cambridge, MA 02139
          Phone: 510-642-5029                         Phone: 617-621-7527
         yweiss@cs.berkeley.edu                        freeman @merl.com



                                        Abstract
        Local "belief propagation" rules of the sort proposed by Pearl [15] are
        guaranteed to converge to the correct posterior probabilities in singly
        connected graphical models. Recently, a number of researchers have em-
        pirically demonstrated good performance of "loopy belief propagation"-
        using these same rules on graphs with loops. Perhaps the most dramatic
        instance is the near Shannon-limit performance of "Turbo codes", whose
        decoding algorithm is equivalent to loopy belief propagation.
        Except for the case of graphs with a single loop, there has been little theo-
        retical understanding of the performance of loopy propagation. Here we
        analyze belief propagation in networks with arbitrary topologies when
        the nodes in the graph describe jointly Gaussian random variables. We
        give an analytical formula relating the true posterior probabilities with
        those calculated using loopy propagation. We give sufficient conditions
        for convergence and show that when belief propagation converges it gives
        the correct posterior means for all graph topologies, not just networks
        with a single loop.
        The related "max-product" belief propagation algorithm finds the max-
        imum posterior probability estimate for singly connected networks. We
        show that, even for non-Gaussian probability distributions, the conver-
        gence points of the max-product algorithm in loopy networks are max-
        ima over a particular large local neighborhood of the posterior proba-
        bility. These results help clarify the empirical performance results and
        motivate using the powerful belief propagation algorithm in a broader
        class of networks.

Problems involving probabilistic belief propagation arise in a wide variety of applications,
including error correcting codes, speech recognition and medical diagnosis. If the graph
is singly connected, there exist local message-passing schemes to calculate the posterior
probability of an unobserved variable given the observed variables. Pearl [15] derived such
a scheme for singly connected Bayesian networks and showed that this "belief propagation"
algorithm is guaranteed to converge to the correct posterior probabilities (or "beliefs").
Several groups have recently reported excellent experimental results by running algorithms
674                                                                  Y. Weiss and W T. Freeman


equivalent to Pearl's algorithm on networks with loops [8, 13, 6]. Perhaps the most dramatic
instance of this performance is for "Turbo code" [2] error correcting codes. These codes
have been described as "the most exciting and potentially important development in coding
theory in many years" [12] and have recently been shown [10, 11] to utilize an algorithm
equivalent to belief propagation in a network with loops.
Progress in the analysis of loopy belief propagation has been made for the case of networks
with a single loop [17, 18, 4, 1] . For these networks, it can be shown that (1) unless
all the compatabilities are deterministic, loopy belief propagation will converge. (2) The
difference between the loopy beliefs and the true beliefs is related to the convergence rate
of the messages - the faster the convergence the more exact the approximation and (3) If
the hidden nodes are binary, then the loopy beliefs and the true beliefs are both maximized
by the same assignments, although the confidence in that assignment is wrong for the loopy
beliefs.
In this paper we analyze belief propagation in graphs of arbitrary topology, for nodes de-
scribing jointly Gaussian random variables. We give an exact formula relating the correct
marginal posterior probabilities with the ones calculated using loopy belief propagation.
We show that if belief propagation converges, then it will give the correct posterior means
for all graph topologies, not just networks with a single loop. We show that the covari-
ance estimates will generally be incorrect but present a relationship between the error in
the covariance estimates and the convergence speed. For Gaussian or non-Gaussian vari-
ables, we show that the "max-product" algorithm, which calculates the MAP estimate in
singly connected networks, only converges to points that are maxima over a particular large
neighborhood of the posterior probability of loopy networks.



1 Analysis

To simplify the notation, we assume the graphical model has been preprocessed into an
undirected graphical model with pairwise potentials. Any graphical model can be con-
verted into this form, and running belief propagation on the pairwise graph is equivalent
to running belief propagation on the original graph [18]. We assume each node X i has a
local observation Yi . In each iteration of belief propagation, each node X i sends a message
to each neighboring X j that is based on the messages it received from the other neighbors,
its local observation Yl and the pairwise potentials Wij(Xi , Xj) and Wii(Xi, Yi) . We assume
the message-passing occurs in parallel.
The idea behind the analysis is to build an unwrapped tree. The unwrapped tree is the
graphical model which belief propagation is solving exactly when one applies the belief
propagation rules in a loopy network [9, 20, 18]. It is constructed by maintaining the same
local neighborhood structure as the loopy network but nodes are replicated so there are no
loops. The potentials and the observations are replicated from the loopy graph. Figure 1 (a)
shows an unwrapped tree for the diamond shaped graph in (b). By construction, the belief
at the root node X- I is identical to that at node Xl in the loopy graph after four iterations of
belief propagation. Each node has a shaded observed node attached to it, omitted here for
clarity.
Because the original network represents jointly Gaussian variables, so will the unwrapped
tree. Since it is a tree, belief propagation is guaranteed to give the correct answer for the
unwrapped graph. We can thus use Gaussian marginalization formulae to calculate the
true mean and variances in both the original and the unwrapped networks. In this way, we
calculate the accuracy of belief propagation for Gaussian networks of arbitrary topology.
We assume that the joint mean is zero (the means can be added-in later). The joint distri-
Correctness of Belief Propagation                                                           675




Figure 1: Left: A Markov network with mUltiple loops. Right: The unwrapped network
corresponding to this structure.


bution of z = ( :     ) is given by P(z) = ae-!zTVz, where V = (~:: ~::) . It
is straightforward to construct the inverse covariance matrix V of the joint Gaussian that
describes a given Gaussian graphical model [3].
Writing out the exponent of the joint and completing the square shows that the mean I-' of
x, given the observations y, is given by:
                                                                                            (1)

and the covariance matrix C~IY of x given y is: C~IY = V~-;l. We will denote by C~dY the
ith row of C~IY so the marginal posterior variance of Xi given the data is (72 (i) = C~i Iy (i).
We will use - for unwrapped quantities. We scan the tree in breadth first order and denote by
x the vector of values in the hidden nodes of the tree when so scanned. Simlarly, we denote
by y the observed nodes scanned in the same order and Vn , V~y the inverse covariance
matrices. Since we are scanning in breadth first order the last nodes are the leaf nodes and
we denote by L the number of leaf nodes. By the nature of unwrapping, tL(1) is the mean
of the belief at node Xl after t iterations of belief propagation, where t is the number of
unwrappings. Similarly 0- 2 (1) = 6~1Iy(1) is the variance of the belief at node Xl after t
iterations.
Because the data is replicated we can write y = Oy where O(i, j) = 1 if Yi is a replica of Yj
and 0 otherwise. Since the potentials W(Xi' Yi) are replicated, we can write V~yO = OV~y.
Since the W(Xi, X j) are also replicated and all non-leaf Xi have the same connectivity as
the corresponding Xi, we can write V~~O = OVzz + E where E is zero in all but the last
L rows. When these relationships between the loopy and unwrapped inverse covariance
matrices are substituted into the loopy and unwrapped versions of equation I, one obtains
the following expression, true for any iteration [19]:
                                                                                            (2)

where e is a vector that is zero everywhere but the last L components (corresponding to the
leaf nodes). Our choice of the node for the root of the tree is arbitrary, so this applies to
all nodes of the loopy network. This formula relates, for any node of a network with loops,
the means calculated at each iteration by belief propagation with the true posterior means.
Similarly when the relationship between the loopy and unwrapped inverse covariance ma-
trices is substituted into the loopy and unwrapped definitions of C~IY we can relate the
676                                                                Y Weiss and W T Freeman

                 0.5

                 0.4


          ~      0.3
          ~
         .~      0.2
          n;
         ~ 0.1
          8
         "t:>
          §        0

                -0.1

                -0.2
                       0         20         40          60           80          100
                                                 node


Figure 2: The conditional correlation between the root node and all other nodes in the
unwrapped tree of Fig. 1 after eight iterations. Potentials were chosen randomly. Nodes
are presented in breadth first order so the last elements are the correlations between the root
node and the leaf nodes. We show that if this correlation goes to zero, belief propagation
converges and the loopy means are exact. Symbols plotted with a star denote correlations
with nodes that correspond to the node Xl in the loopy graph. The sum of these correlations
gives the correct variance of node Xl while loopy propagation uses only the first correlation.


marginalized covariances calculated by belief propagation to the true ones [19]:
                            -2         2         -           -
                            a (1) = a (1) + CZllyel - Czt/ye2                              (3)
where el is a vector that is zero everywhere but the last L components while e2 is equal
to 1 for all nodes in the unwrapped tree that are replicas of Xl except for Xl. All other
components of e2 are zero,
Figure 2 shows Cz1l Y for the diamond network in Fig. 1. We generated random potential
functions and observations and calculated the conditional correlations in the unwrapped
tree. Note that the conditional correlation decreases with distance in the tree - we are
scanning in breadth first order so the last L components correspond to the leaf nodes.
As the number of iterations of loopy propagation is increased the size of the unwrapped
tree increases and the conditional correlation between the leaf nodes and the root node
decreases.
From equations 2-3 it is clear that if the conditional correlation between the leaf nodes and
the root nodes are zero for all sufficiently large unwrappings then (1) belief propagation
converges (2) the means are exact and (3) the variances may be incorrect. In practice the
conditional correlations will not actually be equal to zero for any finite unwrapping. In [19]
we give a more precise statement: if the conditional correlation of the root node and the
leaf nodes decreases rapidly enough then (1) belief propagation converges (2) the means
are exact and (3) the variances may be incorrect. We also show sufficient conditions on the
potentials III (Xi, X j) for the correlation to decrease rapidly enough: the rate at which the
correlation decreases is determined by the ratio of off-diagonal and diagonal components
in the quadratic fonn defining the potentials [19].
How wrong will the variances be? The tenn CZllye2 in equation 3 is simply the sum of
many components of Cz11y . Figure 2 shows these components. The correct variance is
the sum of all the components witHe the belief propagation variance approximates this sum
with the first (and dominant) tenn. Whenever there is a positive correlation between the
root node and other replicas of Xl the loopy variance is strictly less than the true variance
- the loopy estimate is overconfident.
Correctness of Belief Propagation                                                         677




                                            ~07
                                            e
                                            iDO.6
                                            .,
                                           ";;;05
                                            fr
                                            ~04        SOR
                                           '"~03
                                                 0.2
                                                 0.1



                                                             20      30        40   50   60
                                                                  iterations
                    (a)                                           (b)

Figure 3: (a) 25 x 25 graphical model for simulation. The unobserved nodes (unfilled) were
connected to their four nearest neighbors and to an observation node (filled). (b) The error
of the estimates of loopy propagation and successive over-relaxation (SOR) as a function
of iteration. Note that belief propagation converges much faster than SOR.


Note that when the conditional correlation decreases rapidly to zero two things happen.
First, the convergence is faster (because CZdyel approaches zero faster) . Second, the ap-
proximation error of the variances is smaller (because CZ1 / y e2 is smaller). Thus we have
shown, as in the single loop case, quick convergence is correlated with good approximation.


2 Simulations

We ran belief propagation on the 25 x 25 2D grid of Fig. 3 a. The joint probability was:

                                                                                              (4)


where Wij = 0 if nodes Xi, Xj are not neighbors and 0.01 otherwise and Wii was randomly
selected to be 0 or 1 for all i with probability of 1 set to 0.2. The observations Yi were
chosen randomly. This problem corresponds to an approximation problem from sparse
data where only 20% of the points are visible.
We found the exact posterior by solving equation 1. We also ran belief propagation and
found that when it converged, the calculated means were identical to the true means up
to machine precision. Also, as predicted by the theory, the calculated variances were too
small - the belief propagation estimate was overconfident.
In many applications, the solution of equation 1 by matrix inversion is intractable and iter-
ative methods are used. Figure 3 compares the error in the means as a function of iterations
for loopy propagation and successive-over-relaxation (SOR), considered one of the best
relaxation methods [16]. Note that after essentially five iterations loopy propagation gives
the right answer while SOR requires many more. As expected by the fast convergence, the
approximation error in the variances was quite small. The median error was 0.018. For
comparison the true variances ranged from 0.01 to 0.94 with a mean of 0.322. Also, the
nodes for which the approximation error was worse were indeed the nodes that converged
slower.
678                                                                     Y. Weiss and W T Freeman


3      Discussion

Independently, two other groups have recently analyzed special cases of Gaussian graphical
models. Frey [7] analyzed the graphical model corresponding to factor analysis and gave
conditions for the existence of a stable fixed-point. Rusmevichientong and Van Roy [14]
analyzed a graphical model with the topology of turbo decoding but a Gaussian joint den-
sity. For this specific graph they gave sufficient conditions for convergence and showed
that the means are exact.
Our main interest in the Gaussian case is to understand the performance of belief propaga-
tion in general networks with multiple loops. We are struck by the similarity of our results
for Gaussians in arbitrary networks and the results for single loops of arbitrary distribu-
tions [18]. First, in single loop networks with binary nodes, loopy belief at a node and the
true belief at a node are maximized by the same assignment while the confidence in that
assignment is incorrect. In Gaussian networks with multiple loops, the mean at each node
is correct but the confidence around that mean may be incorrect. Second, for both single-
loop and Gaussian networks, fast belief propagation convergence correlates with accurate
beliefs. Third, in both Gaussians and discrete valued single loop networks, the statistical
dependence between root and leaf nodes governs the convergence rate and accuracy.
The two models are quite different. Mean field approximations are exact for Gaussian
MRFs while they work poorly in sparsely connected discrete networks with a single loop.
The results for the Gaussian and single-loop cases lead us to believe that similar results
may hold for a larger class of networks.
Can our analysis be extended to non-Gaussian distributions? The basic idea applies to
arbitrary graphs and arbitrary potentials: belief propagation is performing exact inference
on a tree that has the same local neighbor structure as the loopy graph. However, the linear
algebra that we used to calculate exact expressions for the error in belief propagation at any
iteration holds only for Gaussian variables.
We have used a similar approach to analyze the related "max-product" belief propagation
algorithm on arbitrary graphs with arbitrary distributions [5] (both discrete and continuous
valued nodes). We show that if the max-product algorithm converges, the max-product
assignment has greater posterior probability then any assignment in a particular large region
around that assignment. While this is a weaker condition than a global maximum, it is much
stronger than a simple local maximum of the posterior probability.
The sum-product and max-product belief propagation algorithms are fast and paralleliz-
able. Due to the well known hardness of probabilistic inference in graphical models, belief
propagation will obviously not work for arbitrary networks and distributions. Nevertheless,
a growing body of empirical evidence shows its success in many networks with loops. Our
results justify applying belief propagation in certain networks with mUltiple loops. This
may enable fast, approximate probabilistic inference in a range of new applications.


References
    [1] S.M. Aji, G.B. Hom, and R.J. McEliece. On the convergence of iterative decoding on graphs
        with a single cycle. In Proc. 1998 ISIT, 1998.
    [2] c. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima. Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and
        decoding: Turbo codes. In Proc. IEEE International Communications Conference '93, 1993.
    [3] R. Cowell. Advanced inference in Bayesian networks. In M.1. Jordan, editor, Learning in
        Graphical Models . MIT Press, 1998.
    [4] G.D. Forney, F.R. Kschischang, and B. Marcus. Iterative decoding of tail-biting trellisses.
        preprint presented at 1998 Information Theory Workshop in San Diego, 1998.
Correctness of Belief Propagation                                                              679

 [5] W. T. Freeman and Y. Weiss. On the fixed points of the max-product algorithm. Technical
     Report 99-39, MERL, 201 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02139, 1999.
 [6] W.T. Freeman and E.C. Pasztor. Learning to estimate scenes from images. In M.S. Kearns,
     S.A. SoUa, and D.A. Cohn, editors, Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems I I. MIT Press,
     1999.
 [7] B.J. Frey. Turbo factor analysis. In Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems 12. 2000. to
     appear.
 [8) Brendan J. Frey. Bayesian Networksfor Pattern Classification, Data Compression and Channel
     Coding. MIT Press, 1998.
 [9) R.G . Gallager. Low Density Parity Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963.
[10) F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey. Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propaga-
     tion in graphical models. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication , 16(2):219-230,
     1998.
[11] R.J. McEliece, D.J .C. MackKay, and J.F. Cheng. Turbo decoding as as an instance of Pearl's
     'belief propagation' algorithm. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication, 16(2): 140-
     152,1998.
[12J R.J. McEliece, E. Rodemich, and J.F. Cheng. The Turbo decision algorithm. In Proc. 33rd
     Allerton Conference on Communications, Control and Computing, pages 366-379, Monticello,
     IL, 1995.
[I3J K.P. Murphy, Y. Weiss, and M.1. Jordan. Loopy belief propagation for approximate inference :
     an empirical study. In Proceedings of Uncertainty in AI, 1999.
[14] Rusmevichientong P. and Van Roy B. An analysis of Turbo decoding with Gaussian densities.
     In Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems I2 . 2000. to appear.
[15) Judea Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference.
     Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[16J Gilbert Strang. Introduction to Applied Mathel1Ultics. Wellesley-Cambridge, 1986.
[I7J Y. Weiss. Belief propagation and revision in networks with loops. Technical Report 1616, MIT
     AI lab, 1997.
[18J Y. Weiss. Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops. Neural
     Computation, to appear, 2000.
[19] Y. Weiss and W. T. Freeman. Loopy propagation gives the correct posterior means for
     Gaussians. Technical Report UCB.CSD-99-1046, Berkeley Computer Science Dept., 1999.
     www.cs.berkeley.edu yweiss/.
[20J N. Wiberg. Codes and decoding on general graphs. PhD thesis, Department of Electrical
     Engineering, U. Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
