                                                  Limits of locally-globally convergent graph sequences
arXiv:1205.4356v2 [math.CO] 22 Aug 2013




                                                                                Hamed Hatami
                                                                  School of Computer Science, McGill University
                                                                      Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 0G4∗

                                                                              László Lovász
                                            Institute of Mathematics, Eötvös Loránd University Budapest, Hungary H-1117

                                                                               Balázs Szegedy
                                                               Department of Mathematics, University of Toronto
                                                                      Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S2E4
                                                                                       December 2012


                                                                                           Abstract
                                                    The colored neighborhood metric for sparse graphs was introduced by Bollobás and Riordan
                                                [8]. The corresponding convergence notion refines a convergence notion introduced by Benjamini
                                                and Schramm [6]. We prove that even in this refined sense, the limit of a convergent graph
                                                sequence (with uniformly bounded degree) can be represented by a graphing. We study various
                                                topics related to this convergence notion such as: Bernoulli graphings, factor of i.i.d. processes
                                                and hyperfiniteness.




                                            ∗ Research of H.H. was supported by an NSERC and an FQRNT grant. Research of L.L. was supported by ERC

                                          Grant No. 227701 and OTKA grant No. CNK 77780. Research of B.Sz. was supported by an NSERC grant.


                                                                                                1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                      2

2 Local-Global convergence of bounded degree graphs                                                 4

3 Involution-invariant measures and graphings                                                       5

4 Local limits of decorated graphs                                                                  7

5 A regularization lemma                                                                            8

6 Proof of the main theorem                                                                         9

7 Bernoulli graphings and Bernoulli graph sequences                                                11

8 Joins and maximal graphings                                                                      15

9 Non-standard graphings                                                                           17

10 Hyperfinite graphs and graphings                                                                18

11 Graphings as operators and expander graphings                                                   20

12 Graphings and local algorithms                                                                  21

13 Concluding remarks                                                                              23


1    Introduction
The theory of graph convergence is a recently emerging field. It creates a link between combinatorics
and analysis similarly as Fürstenberg’s correspondence principle connects finite integer sequences
with measure preserving systems. Interestingly (or rather unfortunately) there is no unified theory
of graph convergence. Instead there are various convergence notions that work well in different
situations. For example the theory of dense graph limits [25, 26, 11] works well if the number of
edges is quadratic in the number of vertices but it trivializes for sparser graphs. On the other hand
the Benjamini–Schramm limit [6] is only defined for graphs which have a linear number of edges in
terms of the vertices. In the regime between linear and quadratic the situation is more complicated.
   In this paper we focus on the very sparse case were graphs have degrees bounded by some fixed
number d (which we consider as fixed throughout). According to Benjamini and Schramm, a graph
sequence (Gn )∞
              n=1 is convergent if the distribution of the isomorphism types of neighborhoods of
radius r (when a vertex is chosen uniformly at random in Gn ) converges for every fixed r. This notion
of convergence is called local convergence, weak convergence or Benjamini–Schramm convergence.
    The following example illustrates why a different, stronger notion of convergence is needed in
some cases. For odd n, let Gn be a d-regular expander graph on n nodes. For even n, let Gn be



                                                  2
the disjoint union of two d-regular expander graphs on n/2 nodes. Assume that the girth of Gn
tends to infinity. Then the sequence Gn is locally convergent, but clearly even and odd members
of the sequence are quite different, and it would be desirable to refine our notion of convergence to
distinguish them.
    Bollobás and Riordan [8] introduced such a finer convergence notion (i.e., fewer sequences are
convergent). A graph sequence (Gn )∞n=1 is convergent in this sense if for every r, k ∈ N and ε > 0
there is an index l such that if n, m > l, then for every coloring of the vertices of Gn with k
colors, there is a coloring of the vertices of Gm with k colors such that the distance between the
distributions of colored neighborhoods of radius r in Gn and Gm is at most ε. This is equivalent
to saying that Gn and Gm are close in the colored neighborhood metric introduced in [8]. This
finer notion of convergence is sensitive to both local and global properties of the graphs whereas the
Benjamini–Schramm convergence is only sensitive to local properties. For this reason we call this
notion local-global convergence.
   Benjamini and Schramm described a limit object for locally convergent sequences in the form
of an involution-invariant distribution on rooted countable graphs with bounded degree. One can
also describe this limit object as a graphing (Aldous and Lyons [1], Elek [14]), which is a bounded
degree graph on a Borel probability space such that the edge set is Borel measurable and it satisfies
a certain measure preservation property. (We will give a precise definition below.) Neighborhood
statistics in graphings can be defined by using the probability space structure on the vertex set.
Every involution-invariant distribution can be represented by a graphing. We note that graphings
are common generalizations of bounded degree graphs and measure preserving systems and so they
are also interesting from an ergodic theoretic point of view.
   However, the graphing representing the limit object of a locally convergent graph sequence is
not unique: different graphings can describe the same involution-invariant distribution. In other
words, a graphing contains more information than just the limiting neighborhood distribution. This
suggests that graphings can be used to represent limit objects for more refined convergence notions.
Indeed, in the present paper we show that the limit of a local-global convergent sequence can also
be represented by a graphing in the sense that the graphs in the sequence converge to the graphing
in the colored neighborhood metric. This means that for every local-global convergent sequence we
produce a graphing which contains both local and global information about the graphs.
   We highlight the importance of a special family of graphings called Bernoulli graphings. We
show that with given local statistics, the Bernoulli graphings contain the least global information.
This means that the global properties of a Bernoulli graphing can be modeled with an arbitrary
precision on any other graphing with the same local statistics. For a graph G, being close to a
Bernoulli graphing in the local-global sense means that the local statistics of any coloring on G can
be modeled by a randomized process called local algorithm or factor of i.i.d. process.
   Roughly speaking, a hyperfinite graph sequence is a bounded degree sequence whose members
can be cut into small connected components removing a small set of vertices (or equivalently edges).
We prove that a locally convergent hyperfinite sequence is locally-globally convergent, and its limit
is a Bernoulli graphing. (This was proved independently by Elek [16]). It is an interesting question
how to construct a non-hyperfinite sequence converging to a Bernoulli graphing.


                                                  3
2     Local-Global convergence of bounded degree graphs
A rooted graph is a pair (G, o) where o is a vertex of a graph G. The radius of a rooted graph is the
distance of the farthest vertex in G to o. We denote by U r the set of all rooted graphs with radius
at most r (and all degrees bounded by d). For an integer r ≥ 0, and a vertex v in a graph G, let
NG,r (v) denote the subgraph of G rooted at v and induced by the vertices that are at a distance
at most r from v. Two rooted graphs (G, o) and (G′ , o′ ) are said to be isomorphic if there is an
isomorphism from G to G′ that maps o to o′ .
    Given a finite graph G and a radius r ≥ 0, we can choose a node v ∈ V (G) uniformly and
randomly, and consider the distribution of NG,r (v). Let PG,r denote this probability measure on
U r . We say that a sequence (Gn ) of finite graphs is locally convergent (or Benjamini–Schramm
convergent) if PGn ,r converges to a limit distribution as n → ∞, for every fixed r ≥ 0.
   Denote the set of probability measures on a Borel space X by M (X). Note that since U r is
finite, all the usual distances on M (U r ) are topologically equivalent. We shall usually work with the
total variation distance dvar , defined (in general, for a space X) by

                                    dvar (µ, ν) = sup |µ(A) − ν(A)|
                                                 A⊆X

where A runs through the Borel measurable sets.
    To define our refinement of local convergence, we consider vertex colorings. For a finite graph
G, let K(k, G) denote the set of all vertex colorings with k colors. Fix integers k and r, and let
U r,k be the set of all triples (H, o, c) where (H, o) is a rooted graph of radius at most r and c is an
arbitrary k-coloring of V (H). Consider a finite graph G together with a c ∈ K(k, G). Pick a random
vertex v from G. Then the restriction of the k-coloring to NG,r (v) is an element in U r,k , and thus
for the graph G, every c ∈ K(k, G) introduces a probability distribution on U r,k which we denote
by PG,r [c]. Sometimes we refer to the probability distributions PG,r [c] (for r ≥ 0) as local statistics
of the coloring c. Let
                            QG,r,k := PG,r [c] : c ∈ K(k, G) ⊆ M (U r,k ).
                                     

These sets are similar to “quotient sets” introduced in [12] for dense graphs, except that there only
edges with the given coloring were counted, while here we consider the colors on larger neighborhoods.
                                                                                               r,k
Notice that the sets QG,r,k are finite, and they are subsets of the finite dimensional space RU that
is independent of the graph G.

Definition 2.1 A sequence of finite graphs (Gn )∞
                                                n=1 with all degrees at most d is called locally-
globally convergent if for every r, k ≥ 1, the sequence (QGn ,r,k )∞
                                                                   n=1 converges in the Hausdorff
distance inside the compact metric space (M (U r,k ), dvar ).

    In other words, if i and j are large enough, then for every k-coloring ci of V (Gi ) there is a
k-coloring cj of V (Gj ) so that the distributions of colored r-neighborhoods of (Gi , ci ) and (Gj , cj )
are almost the same.
  Since compact subsets of a compact metric space form a compact space with respect to the
Hausdorff metric, it follows that every infinite sequence of finite graphs contains a locally-globally
convergent subsequence.

                                                    4
    Fixing k = 1 in Definition 2.1, we recover a metric definition of Benjamini–Schramm convergence.
It is easy to construct examples of graph sequences which are convergent in Benjamini–Schramm
sense, but not locally-globally. However we do not know whether k = 2 would give a convergence
notion equivalent to local-global convergence.
   It is natural to ask if we obtain a different convergence notion if we replace vertex colorings by
edge colorings or other locally defined extra structures. It turns out that all local structures can
be encoded by vertex colorings, and thus they do not lead to different convergence notions. As an
example, we show how to encode edge colorings by vertex colorings.
   Let G be a graph with all degrees at most d and let c : E(G) → [k] be an edge coloring of G. It
is easy to see that there exists an edge coloring c1 : E(G) → [30d3 k] such that c1 (e) ≡ c(e) modulo
k for every e ∈ E(G), and if c1 (e1 ) = c1 (e2 ) holds, then the edges e1 and e2 are of distance at least
3 in the edge graph of G. It is clear that c1 encodes the coloring c in the sense that local statistics
of c1 modulo k give the local statistics of c. Let S denote the set of subsets of [30d3 k] of size at
most d. We define the vertex coloring c2 : V (G) → S by setting c2 (v) to be the set of c1 -colors of
the edges incident to v. Now it is easy to see that c2 encodes the coloring c1 in the following way.
If e = (v, w) is an edge in G, then {c1 (e)} is the intersection of the sets c2 (v) and c2 (w).


3     Involution-invariant measures and graphings
Benjamini and Schramm [6] associated a limit object with every locally convergent graph sequence
as follows. Let G denote the set of (isomorphism classes of) rooted, connected (possibly infinite)
graphs with all degrees at most d. For a rooted graph (B, o) with radius r, we denote by G(B, o)
the set of all rooted graphs (G, o) such that NG,r (o) ∼
                                                       = (B, o). For a rooted graph (G, o), we define
a neighborhood basis at (G, o) as G(NG,r (o)). These neighborhoods define a topology on G. It is
easy to see that this is a compact separable space.
  The Benjamini–Schramm limit of the locally convergent graph sequence (Gn )∞
                                                                            n=1 is a probability
measure ν on the Borel sets of G, such that

                                     lim PGn ,r (B, o) = ν(G(B, o))
                                    n→∞

for every r ≥ 1 and every rooted graph (B, o) of radius r.
   Not every probability measure on G arises as the limit of a convergent graph sequence. One
property that all limits have is called involution invariance or unimodularity. To define this, let G̃
denote the space of graphs in G with a distinguished edge incident to the root. Let α : G̃ → G̃
denote the continuous transformation that moves the root to the other endpoint of the distinguished
edge. For every probability measure µ on G, define µ∗ to be the unique probability measure on G
such that dµ∗ /dµ(G) is proportional to the degree of the root in G. Define the probability measure
µ̃ on G̃ by first picking a µ∗ -random graph, and then distinguishing a random edge incident to the
root. The measure µ is called involution-invariant if µ̃ is invariant under α. Involution-invariant
measures on G form a closed set in the weak topology.
   Let G be a finite graph, and let the probability measure ν on the Borel sets of G be defined as
ν(G(B, o)) = PG,r (B, o) for every r ≥ 1 and every rooted graph (B, o) of radius r. It is easy to see


                                                   5
that ν is involution-invariant. It follows that every measure on G that is the limit of finite graphs is
involution-invariant. Aldous and Lyons [1] conjectured that all involution-invariant measures arise
as graph limits. The Aldous-Lyons conjecture is considered to be one of the most important open
problems in this area.
   In the dense setting, the set of the symmetric measurable maps w : [0, 1]2 → [0, 1] were used
to generalize the concept of graphs and describe graph limits [25]. For local-global convergence
(Definition 2.1), graphings serve this purpose.

Definition 3.1 Let X be a Polish topological space and let ν be a probability measure on the Borel
sets in X. A graphing is a graph G on V (G) = X with Borel measurable edge set E(G) ⊂ X × X in
which all degrees are at most d and
                                Z                 Z
                                   e(x, B)dν(x) =   e(x, A)dν(x)                           (1)
                                    A                    B

for all measurable sets A, B ⊆ X, where e(x, S) is the number of edges from x ∈ X to S ⊆ X.

    Note that every finite graph G is a graphing where X = V (G) and νG is the uniform distribution
on V (G).
    If (1) holds, then η ∗ (A×B) = A e(x, B)dν(x) defines a measure on the Borel sets of X ×X. This
                                  R

measure is concentrated on E(G), symmetric in the two coordinates, and its marginal ν ∗ satisfies
(dν ∗ /dν)(x) = deg(x). Normalizing by d0 = X deg(x) dx, we get a probability distribution η on
                                               R

the set of edges. We can generate a random edge from η by selecting a random point v from ν ∗ and
selecting uniformly a random edge incident with v. Conversely, if G is a Borel graph and we have a
measure η ∗ on X × X that is concentrated on E(G), so that η ∗ (A × B) = A e(x, B)dν(x), then (1)
                                                                          R

follows by Fubini’s theorem, and so G is a graphing.
    Let G be a graphing (of degree at most d) on the probability space (X, ν). Then it induces a
measure µG on G: pick a random element x ∈ X and take its connected component Gx rooted at x.
It is easy to see that µG is an involution-invariant measure. (In fact, (1) just expresses this property.)
   Let G be a graphing as in Definition 3.1. A vertex coloring of G with k colors is a measurable
function c : X → [k]. The set of all such colorings will be denoted by K(k, G). We define PG,r [c]
and QG,r,k in a similar way as in a finite graph. (Notice that it makes sense to talk about a random
                                                                             r,k
vertex in G.) The set QG,r,k is a subset of the finite dimensional space RU , but in general it might
be infinite and not necessarily closed; we will often use its closure QG,r,k (see Question 9.1).
   Now we are ready to state our main theorem.

Theorem 3.2 Let (Gi )∞ i=1 be a local-global convergent sequence of finite graphs with all degrees at
most d. Then there exists a graphing G such that QGn ,r,k → QG,r,k (n → ∞) in Hausdorff distance
for every r and k.

   To what degree is the limit object determined? This question leads to different notions of
“isomorphism” between graphings.

Definition 3.3 Let (G1 , X1 , ν1 ) and (G2 , X2 , ν2 ) be graphings.



                                                     6
    • They are called locally equivalent if for every r ∈ N, the distribution of NG1 ,r (x1 ) is the same
      as the distribution of NG2 ,r (x2 ) for random x1 ∈ X1 and x2 ∈ X2 .

    • They are called locally-globally equivalent if QG1 ,r,k = QG2 ,r,k for every r, k ∈ N.

    Local equivalence of two graphings means that they induce the same involution-invariant measure
on G. Local-global equivalence implies local equivalence by setting k = 1.

Definition 3.4 (Local-global partial order) Assume that G1 and G2 are two graphings of max-
imal degree at most d. We say that G1 ≺ G2 if QG1 ,r,k ⊆ QG2 ,r,k for every r, k ≥ 1. In particular, G1
and G2 are locally-globally equivalent if and only if both G1 ≺ G2 and G2 ≺ G1 hold.

    In the setting of group actions, this partial order means the same as “weak containment” of
the corresponding group actions, and local-global equivalence corresponds to “weak equivalence”
(Kechris [21]).
   Recall that a measurable map φ : (X, µ) → (Y, ν) is called measure-preserving if µ(φ−1 (A)) =
ν(A) for every measurable set A ⊆ Y . An easy way to prove a relation G1 ≺ G2 between two graphings
is the following. We call a measure preserving map φ : V (G1 ) → V (G2 ) a local isomorphism if
restricted to any connected component of G1 , we get an isomorphism with a connected component
of G2 . Clearly local isomorphisms can be combined. However, a local isomorphism may not be
invertible! It is easy to see that the existence of a local isomorphism G1 → G2 implies that G1 and
G2 are locally equivalent, and G2 ≺ G1 .

Example 3.5 Let G be a finite connected graph, and G ∪ G denote the disjoint union of G with
itself. The function φ : V (G ∪ G) → V (G) that maps both copies of G in G ∪ G isomorphically to
G is a (non-invertible) local isomorphism. Consequently G ∪ G and G are locally equivalent, and
G ≺ G ∪ G. However, G and G ∪ G are not locally-globally equivalent.

    We shall study the local-global equivalence and the local-global partial order in Sections 7 and
8. In particular, we will show that among all graphings in a local equivalence class, there is always
a smallest one and a largest one in this partial order.


4     Local limits of decorated graphs
In this section we extend the formalism behind the Benjamini–Schramm limits for the case when
vertices are decorated by elements from a compact space. Let C be a second countable compact
Hausdorff space. Let G(C) denote the space of (isomorphism classes of) rooted, connected (count-
able) graphs with all degrees at most d such that the vertices are decorated by elements from C.
So the points of G(C) are triples (G, o, c), where G is a connected countable graph, o ∈ V (G), and
c : V (G) → C. If C is the trivial (one point) compact space, then G(C) can be identified with the
space G defined earlier. Two important special cases for us will be when C = [0, 1] (assigning [0, 1]-
weights to vertices), and C = [k] (coloring vertices by k colors). With a slight abuse of notation,
these will be denoted by G[0, 1] and G[k].



                                                     7
    We put a compact topology on G(C) by specifying a basis of it. Let r be an arbitrary natural
number and (H, o) be a finite rooted graph of radius r. Assume furthermore that every vertex
v of (H, o) is decorated by an open set Uv in C. Let S be the collection of all (G, o, c) ∈ G(C)
where the neighborhood NG,r (o) is isomorphic to (H, o), and furthermore there is an isomorphism
α : NG,r (o) → (H, o) such that c(v) ∈ Uα(v) for every v ∈ NG,r (o). It is easy to see that G(C)
with this topology is a compact, second countable, Hausdorff space. As a consequence, probability
measures on G(C) form a compact space in the weak topology.
   Let G be a finite graph with all degrees at most d in which the vertices are C-labeled. We
can construct a probability measure µG on G(C) by putting a root o on a randomly chosen vertex
v ∈ V (G) and keeping only the connected component of the root. A sequence (Gn )∞
                                                                                n=1 of C-labeled
                                                                        ∞
graphs is called locally convergent if the corresponding measures {µGn }n=1 converge in the weak
topology to some measure µ. The measure µ is the limit object of the sequence.
   We define involution-invariance completely analogously to the undecorated case, simply replacing
G by G(C) everywhere. Involution-invariant measures on G(C) form a closed set in the weak
topology. It follows that if µ is a measure on G(C) that is the limit of finite C-decorated graphs,
then it is involution-invariant.
    A C-decorated graphing is a graphing G together with a Borel function c : V (G) → C. Similarly
as in the undecorated case, every C-decorated graphing defines an involution-invariant distribution.
The measure µG,c on G(C) is created by picking a random element x ∈ V (G), and taking its
connected component Gx rooted at x together with the vertex labels given by the restriction of c to
V (Gx ). It is easy to see that µG,c is an involution-invariant measure.

Remark 4.1 We can define a Borel graph on G(C). The edge set E(C) of this graph consists
of pairs ((G, o1 , c), (G, o2 , c)) ∈ G(C) × G(C) such that (o1 , o2 ) is an edge in G. Note that loop
edges can arise in this graph. For example if there is an automorphism of (G, c) which takes o1
to its neighbor o2 , then (G, o1 , c) is identified with (G, o2 , c) in G(C). In general it is not true
that every involution-invariant measure ν on G(C) turns this graph into a graphing. This is due
to the problem with automorphisms which also lead to loops. However it is not hard to show that
if for an involution-invariant measure ν, with probability one, a ν-random connected component
has no automorphisms, then we get a graphing (G(C), ν, E(C)). One important role of appropriate
decorations is to break symmetries, and make this graph a graphing.


5     A regularization lemma
The following lemma is the main ingredient in proving Theorem 3.2. It serves as a “regularity
lemma” in our framework for bounded degree graphs.

Lemma 5.1 (Regularization) For positive integers r, k and real number ε > 0, there exists an
integer tr,k,ε such that the following holds. For every graph G with all degrees at most d, there exists
a tr,k,ε -vertex coloring q of G which satisfies the following conditions.

    • If q(v) = q(w), then either v = w or the distance of v and w in G is at least r + 1;



                                                    8
    • For every g ∈ K(k, G), there exists α : [tr,k,ε ] → [k] such that

                                         dvar (PG,r [g], PG,r [α ◦ q]) ≤ ε.

Proof. The space M (U r,k ) is a bounded dimensional compact set with the topology generated by
dvar . Let N be an ε/2-net in M (U r,k ) in dvar . Let NG be the subset of points in N that are at
most ε/2 far from a point of the form PG,r [g] for some g ∈ K(k, G). For each a ∈ NG , we choose a
representative xa = PG,r [ga ] such that dvar (a, xa ) ≤ ε/2. It is clear that for every g ∈ K(k, G), there
is a point xa such that dvar (PG,r [g], xa ) ≤ ε. Let f be the common refinement of all the partitions
{ga }a∈NG . Clearly f has a bounded number of partition sets in terms of r, k, ε and d and it satisfies
the second condition.
   Now we further refine f to satisfy the first condition. Let f ′ be a proper coloring of the graph G
with (d + 1)r colors in which every two vertices in distance at most r receive different colors. The
common refinement q of f and f ′ satisfies both conditions.


6     Proof of the main theorem
Now we introduce the space X which will serve as a universal Borel space for the limit graphings of
                                                                                     Q
sequences of finite graphs with all degrees at most d. Consider the compact space C = k,r,n [tr,k,1/n ]
with the product topology where tr,k,1/n are defined according to Lemma 5.1. We denote by X the
compact space G(C) and by E ⊂ X × X the set of edges ((G, o1 , c), (G, o2 , c)) such that (o1 , o2 )
is an edge in G (See Remark 4.1). Let q : X → C be the function defined as q : (G, o, c) 7→ c(o).
Furthermore for r, k, n ∈ N, define the coloring qr,k,n : X → [tr,k,1/n ] as the composition of q with
the projection to the coordinate (r, k, n) in C.
   Let (Gi )∞
            i=1 be a local-global convergent sequence of graphs with all degrees at most d. For
                                                           i
each Gi and triple (r, k, n) ∈ N3 , we choose a coloring qr,k,n : V (Gi ) → [tr,k,1/n ] guaranteed by
                                                         i
                                                 Q
Lemma 5.1. Let qi : V (Gi ) → C be defined as r,k,n {qr,k,n (v)} ∈ C. As described in Section 4,
each graph Gi together with the coloring qi defines a probability measure µi on X by putting the
root on a random vertex of Gi and keeping only the connected component of the root.
   By choosing a subsequence from (Gi )∞                                           ∞
                                          i=1 we can assume that the sequence {µi }i=1 weakly con-
verges to a probability distribution µ on X. Our goal is to show that the Borel graph (X, E) with
the measure µ is a graphing which represents the local-global limit of (Gi )∞
                                                                            i=1 .
   Let us first observe that for a µ-random element (G, o, c) in (X, µ), with probability one, the
                                                                                                   i
vertex labels {c(v) : v ∈ V (G)} are all different. This follows from the fact that the colorings qr,k,n
separate points in Gi that are closer than r + 1, and that this property is preserved in the limit.
This means that if v, w ∈ V (G) are of distance r, then with probability one their colors projected
to the coordinate (r, k, n) (where k, n are arbitrary) are different.

Lemma 6.1 The measurable graph (X, E, µ) is a graphing.

Proof. Let us introduce the measures {ηi∗ }∞
                                           i=1 , similarly as in Section 3, by
                                                Z
                                 ∗
                                ηi (A × B) =        e(x, B)dµi (x),
                                                     A


                                                     9
where A, B ⊆ X are measurable, and e(x, B) is the number of edges (x, y) ∈ E with y ∈ B. We
define η ∗ analogously as η ∗ (A × B) = A e(x, B)dµ(x).
                                       R

    Assume that A, B ⊂ X are open-closed sets. The weak convergence of {µi }∞i=1 implies that
limi→∞ ηi∗ (A × B) = η ∗ (A × B) and limi→∞ ηi∗ (B × A) = η ∗ (B × A). Note that ηi∗ (A × B) =
ηi∗ (B × A), since both are equal (up to normalization by |V (Gi )|) to the number of edges between
the sets {v|(Gi , v, qi ) ∈ A} and {v|(Gi , v, qi ) ∈ B}. Here we used the fact that the vertex labels
qi (·) are all different and thus automorphisms of Gi cannot cause any problems. We obtain that
η ∗ (B × A) = η ∗ (A × B), and since such product sets generate the whole σ-algebra on X × X, the
proof is complete.

                                                 i
Lemma 6.2 The probability distributions PGi ,r [qr,k,n ] converge to PG,r [qr,k,n ] as i → ∞ for every
fixed triple r, k, n ∈ N.

Proof. Pick a µ-random point x = (G, o, c) ∈ X. Let the rooted graph Gx be the connected
component of x in the graphing G rooted at x. There is a natural vertex coloring on Gx which is the
restriction of the function q to the vertices of Gx . So Gx can be regarded as an element in X. We
claim that with probability one x = (G, o, c) is isomorphic (in a root and label preserving way) to
(Gx , q|Gx ). Indeed with probability one all the vertex labels of G are different, and in this case the
map given by v 7→ (G, v, c) defines a decoration-preserving isomorphism between (G, o, c) and Gx .
(The fact that the vertex labels in G are all different guarantees that the map is one to one.)
   We conclude that the probability distribution PG,r [qr,k,n ] is the same as the distribution of
(NG,r (o), cr,k,n ) where (G, o, c) is a µ-random element in X, and cr,k,n is the projection of c to the
coordinate (r, k, n). The lemma now follows from the weak convergence of {µi }∞    i=1 to µ.


Lemma 6.3 For every r, k ∈ N and ε > 0 there is an index i0 such that for every i ≥ i0 and
c ∈ K(k, Gi ), there is a k-coloring c′ of X such that dvar (PGi ,r [c], PG,r [c′ ]) ≤ ε.

   Proof. Let n ≥ 2/ε. By Lemma 6.2 there is an index i0 such that

                                                     i                            ε
                                      dvar (PGi ,r [qr,k,n ], PG,r [qr,k,n ]) ≤                     (2)
                                                                                  2
for every index i ≥ i0 . Let i ≥ i0 be arbitrary, and let c ∈ K(k, Gi ) be a k-coloring of Gi . Then by
Lemma 5.1 there is a map α : [tr,k,ε/2 ] → [k] such that

                                                                 i            1  ε
                                  dvar (PGi ,r [c], PGi ,r [α ◦ qr,k,n ]) ≤     ≤ .
                                                                              n  2
The definition of the total variation distance and (2) imply that

                                                    i                                 ε
                                 dvar (PGi ,r [α ◦ qr,k,n ], PG,r [α ◦ qr,k,n ]) ≤      .
                                                                                      2
Hence c′ = α ◦ qr,k,n satisfies the required condition.

Lemma 6.4 For every coloring c ∈ K(k, G), r ∈ N and ε > 0 there is an index i0 such that for
every i ≥ i0 , there is a coloring c′ ∈ K(k, Gi ) with dvar (PGi ,r [c′ ], PG,r [c]) ≤ ε.

                                                          10
    Proof. Let c : X → [k] be a Borel coloring. Then for every δ > 0, there is a continuous coloring
cδ : X → [k] such that |µ(c−1 (a)△c−1
                                    δ (a))| ≤ δ for all 1 ≤ a ≤ k. Taking δ to be sufficiently small,
we have
                                                                  ε
                                     dvar (PG,r [cδ ], PG,r [c]) ≤ .                             (3)
                                                                  2
    Let the graphing Gi be the same as the graphing G with the only difference that the measure µ is
replaced by µi . Since {µi }∞
                            i=1 converges weakly to µ and cδ is continuous, there is an index i0 such
that if i ≥ i0 , then
                                                             ε
                                      dvar (PGi ,r [cδ ], PG,r [cδ ]) ≤
                                                               .                                (4)
                                                             2
The coloring cδ induces a coloring fδi on Gi which assigns to every vertex v ∈ V (Gi ) the cδ color
of the rooted graph (Gi , v, qi ) ∈ X. Then we have PGi ,r [fδi ] ≡ PGi ,r [cδ ]. Together with (3) and (4),
this completes the proof.


7     Bernoulli graphings and Bernoulli graph sequences
Probably the most fundamental graphing construction is the Bernoulli graphing corresponding to
an involution-invariant measure. These graphings are closely related to factor of i.i.d. processes and
local algorithms. In this chapter we explain their role in local-global convergence.

Definition 7.1 (Bernoulli graphings) Let µ be an involution-invariant measure on G. Let ν be
the probability measure on G[0, 1] produced by putting independent random weights from [0, 1] on
the nodes of a µ-random graph. (Note that different choices of the weights can lead to the same
point of G[0, 1], if they can be transformed into each other by an automorphism of the µ-random
rooted graph.) The triple (G[0, 1], ν, E[0, 1]) as defined in Remark 4.1 will be called the Bernoulli
graphing corresponding to µ, and denoted by Bµ .

   It is not hard to see that Bµ is a graphing and it represents the involution-invariant distribution
µ (Elek [14]).

Remark 7.2 Perhaps it would be more natural to decorate the nodes of the µ-random graph by
independent bits, or more generally, by colors from [k] for some fixed k ≥ 2. This would yield an
involution-invariant distribution on G[k], but the graph (G[k], E[k]) together with this distribution
would not necessarily form a graphing.

    We define the Bernoulli graphing BG corresponding to an arbitrary graphing G as the Bernoulli
graphing defined by the involution-invariant distribution induced by G on G. Clearly G and BG are
locally equivalent.

Example 7.3 A simple example for a Bernoulli graphing is provided by the involution-invariant
measure which is concentrated on a single d-regular rooted tree. Let T denote the rooted d-regular
tree, and let (X, ν) be the probability space in which we put independent random weights from [0, 1]
on the vertices of T . Two points of X are connected in G if they can be obtained from each other by
moving the root to a neighboring vertex. It seems to be an interesting problem to decide whether
the sets QG,r,k are all closed (see also Question 9.1).

                                                      11
   The following is a related construction. For every graphing G on the probability space (X, ν),
we define its Bernoulli lift G + as follows. The underlying set X + of G + will be pairs (x, ξ), where
x ∈ X and ξ : V (Gx ) → [0, 1] assigns weights from [0, 1] to the vertices of the connected component
Gx rooted at x. We connect (x, ξ) to (y, υ) if y is a neighbor of x and ξ = υ. (Note that if y is
a neighbor of x, then Gx = Gy .) The measure on X + is defined as follows. To generate a random
element of X + , one picks a ν-random point x ∈ X, and then assigns independent random weights
ξ(u) to the nodes u of Gx .
   We define two maps φ : V (G + ) → V (G) and ψ : V (G + ) → V (BG ) by φ(x, ξ) = x and
                
ψ(x, ξ) = Gx , ξ . It is easy to check that the maps φ and ψ are local isomorphisms. This implies
that graphing G is locally equivalent to its Bernoulli lift G + as well as its Bernoulli graphing BG .
   Our main goal in this section is to describe the relationship between G, BG and G + from the
point of view of local-global equivalence.

Definition 7.4 A graphing is called atom-free if its underlying probability space contains no mass
points.

Remark 7.5 Note that no finite graph corresponds to an atom-free graphing. Using the graphing
property (1), it is easy to see that if a graphing contains an atom, then this belongs to a finite
component. If G is the local limit of a sequence of connected graphs (Gn )∞n=1 with V (Gn )| → ∞,
then all its components are infinite, and hence it is atom-free. On the other hand, if the union of
finite components of a graphing has positive weight, then merging isomorphic finite components we
get atoms. Furthermore, if G is the local-global limit of graphs (Gn )∞
                                                                      n=1 (not necessarily connected)
with |V (Gn )| → ∞, then G is atom-free. This follows from the observation that a graphing is
atom-free if and only if its points have a Borel k-coloring with equal color classes for every k.

   The following is our main result in this section.

Theorem 7.6 Every atom-free graphing is local-global equivalent to its Bernoulli lift.

   The map ψ : V (G + ) → V (BG ) defined above is a local isomorphism from G + to BG . Thus we
have the relation BG ≺ G + , which implies by Theorem 7.6:

Corollary 7.7 (Minimality of Bernoulli graphings) For every atom-free graphing G, we have
BG ≺ G.

   In other words, Bernoulli graphings are minimal elements in the set of atom-free graphings in
their local equivalence class. A group theoretical analogue of this fact was obtained by Abért and
Weiss in [2].
  In an algorithmic setting, a Borel coloring of G + can be considered as a coloring that depends
not only on the graph, but also on a random real number at each point. To be able to imitate this
in G, we have to construct “random-like” colorings on G. For technical reasons, we have to deal with
graphings that already have a Borel coloring.

Definition 7.8 (Quasirandom colorings) Let G be a graphing on the space (X, ν), and let
h : X → [l] be a Borel coloring. Let µr,h,k be the probability distribution on U r,kl obtained

                                                 12
from ν by considering the r-neighborhood of a random element x ∈ X and decorating its vertices
by random independent elements from [k] (in addition to the given l-coloring h). We say that a
measurable coloring c : X → [k] is (r, ε)-quasirandom if dvar (PG,r [c × h], µr,h,k ) ≤ ε where c × h
denotes the kl-coloring with pairs of colors (c(x), h(x)).

Lemma 7.9 (Existence of quasirandom colorings) Let G be a atom-free graphing on the space
(X, ν). Then for every k, r, l ∈ N, ε > 0 and Borel l-coloring h, there is an (r, ε)-quasirandom
coloring c : X → [k] of (G, h).

Proof. Let C = {0, 1}N be the Cantor set with the uniform measure. Since (X, ν) has no mass
points, there is a measurable equivalence between C and X, without loss of generality, we can
identify the two spaces, assume that X = C. Let πi : C → {0, 1}i be the projection onto the first i
coordinates. The map πi is measure preserving if we consider the uniform measure on {0, 1}i. Fix
k, r ∈ N, and let gi : {0, 1}i → [k] be a uniform random coloring of {0, 1}i with k colors. Our goal
is to show that if i is sufficiently large, then with a large probability gi ◦ πi is (r, ε)-quasirandom.

Claim 1 For every ε1 > 0 and n ∈ N, there is an index j such that if x1 , . . . , xn ∈ X are independent
ν-random points, then with probability 1 − ε1 , the map πj separates all the points in ∪ni=1 NG,r (xi ).

   It is easy to see that π = (π1 , π2 , . . . ) separates the points of ∪ni=1 NG,r (xi ) with probability 1
on X n . Let Yj denote the set of points (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) in X n for which πj separates the points in
∪ni=1 NG,r (xi ). Then Yj is an increasing chain of measurable sets such that ν(∪∞        i=1 Yi ) = 1. This
shows that for some index j, we have ν(Yj ) > 1 − ε1 and completes the proof of Claim 1.
   Let x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ X n and let g be a k-coloring ∪ni=1 NG,r (xi ). Let us say that x is represen-
tative if the distribution of the l-colored neighborhood NG,h,r (xt ) for a random t ∈ [n] is ε/6-close
to the distribution µr,h := PG,r [h]. Let us say that (x, g) is representative if the distribution of the
kl-colored neighborhood (NG,h,r (xt ), g) is ε/3-close to the distribution µr,h,k .
   Let x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ X n be chosen randomly and independently from the distribution ν. We
note that with probability 1, the neighborhoods NG,r (xi ) are disjoint. If n is large enough, then
(just by the Law of Large Numbers)
                                                                 ε
                                     Prx (x representative) ≥ 1 − .
                                                                 6
Hence if g is a uniform random k-coloring of ∪ni=1 NG,r (xi ), and n is large enough, then (by the Law
of Large Numbers again), we have
                                                                      ε
                                   Prx,g ((x, g) representative) ≥ 1 − .
                                                                      3
Let us fix n so that this holds.
   Next, using Claim 1, we fix j so that (for a random x) πj separates all the points in ∪ni=1 NG,r (xi )
with probability at least 1 − ε/3. Whenever this happens, the restriction of gj ◦ πj to ∪ni=1 NG,r (xi )
is a uniform random k-coloring. In other words, we can generate a uniform random k-coloring of
∪ni=1 NG,r (xi ) by restricting gj ◦ πj to it if πj separates it, and randomly k-coloring it otherwise.
Thus
                                                                                   ε     2ε
            Prx,gj ((x, gj ◦ πj ) representative) ≥ Prx,g ((x, g) representative) − ≥ 1 − .
                                                                                   3     3

                                                     13
It follows that there is at least one k-coloring gj for which
                                                                                 2ε
                                  Prx ((x, gj ◦ πj ) representative) ≥ 1 −          .
                                                                                 3
Let us fix such a gj . Then c = gj ◦πj is an (r, ε)-quasirandom k-coloring of X. In fact, we can generate
a random point of x by first generating n independent random points x1 , . . . , xn and choosing one of
them, xt , uniformly at random. Then with probability at least 1 − 2ε/3, (x, gj ◦ πj ) is representative,
and whenever this happens, the distribution of the kl-colored neighborhood (NG,h,r (xt ), gj ◦ πj ) is
ε/3-close to the distribution µr,h,k . It follows that the total variation distance of (NG,h,r (xt ), gj ◦ πj )
from µr,h,k , when xt is also randomly chosen, is at most ε.

   Our next lemma shows that we can approximate any measurable k-coloring of G + by a k-coloring
that is “locally computable” in the sense that the color of a node depends only on a colored neigh-
borhood of the node, and it depends only on a discrete approximation of the nodeweights. To
be precise, we define the (m, s)-discretization (m, s ∈ N) as the map ξm,s : X + → U s,m , where
ξm,s (x) is obtained by considering the neighborhood NG + ,s (x), and replacing every nodeweight ξ(v)
by ⌈mξ(v)⌉. Recall that the local isomorphism φ : V (G + ) → V (G) is defined by φ : (x, ξ) 7→ x.

Lemma 7.10 For every r ≥ 1 and ε > 0, and every measurable k-coloring c of G + , there are
positive integers s, m and l, a measurable l-coloring h of G, and a map f : U s,m × [l] → [k] such
that the k-coloring c′ (x) = f ξs,m (x), h(φ(x)) of G + satisfies
                                                


                                         dvar PG + ,r [c], PG + ,r [c′ ] ≤ ε.
                                                                        


Proof. Let (X + , ν + ) be the underlying space of G + . Let K denote the set of all subsets of X + of
           −1
the form ξm,s  (y) ∩ φ−1 (B), where y ∈ U s,m , and B is a Borel set of X. These sets generate the Borel
sets of X + , hence by the Monotone Class Theorem, the closure under pointwise convergence of the
vector space generated by their indicator functions contains every bounded Borel function on X + .
   In particular, there are pairs of integers (mi , si ), colored balls yi ∈ U si ,mi , Borel sets Bi ⊆ X
and real coefficients ai (i = 1, . . . , N ) such that
                                 N
                 n                                                        1o    ε
                                    ai 1(ξmi ,si (x) = yi , φ(x) ∈ Bi ) ≥
                                X
                 +    +
               ν x ∈ X : c(x) −                                              < r+1 .
                                i=1
                                                                          2   d

                                             N
                          Q
Let s = maxi si , m =                , and let h be a Borel l-coloring of X in which every Bi is a
                              i mi , l = 2
                                                                                                       
union of color classes. Then the sum in the above expression can be written as g ξs,m (x), h(φ(x))
for some g : U s,m ×[l] → R. Rounding the values of g to the closest integer in [k], we get a k-coloring
c′ for which
                                                                            ε
                                     ν x ∈ X + : c(x) 6= c′ (x) <
                                      
                                                                                 .
                                                                          dr+1
For a random point x ∈ X + , the probability that the colorings c and c′ differ on any node in its
r-neighborhood is less than ε. This implies the lemma.

   Now we are able to prove the main theorem in this section.

Proof of Theorem 7.6. Our goal is to approximate every element in QG + ,r,k by an element in
QG,r,k with arbitrary precision ε > 0. In other words, we want to construct, for every measurable

                                                         14
k-coloring c of G + , a measurable k-coloring c0 of G that defines a similar distribution of colored
neighborhoods.
                                                                        
   By Lemma 7.10 we may assume that c is of the form f ξs,m (x), h(φ(x)) where h is an l-coloring of
G and f : U s,m → [k]. Let q be an (s, ε)-quasirandom m-coloring of (G, h) guaranteed by Lemma 7.9,
and let G ′ = (G, h × q). Consider the k-coloring of G defined by c0 (z) = f (NG ′ ,s (z), h(z)). We claim
that c0 has similar statistics as c:

                                       dvar (PG + ,r [c], PG,r [c0 ]) ≤ ε.

This follows if we prove that the distributions of (ξs,m (y), h(φ(y)) (where y is a random point
of G + ) and (NG ′ ,s (x), h(x)) (where x is a random point of G) are close. But the distribution of
(ξs,m (y), h(φ(y)) is just µs,h,m , and the distribution of (NG ′ ,s (x), h(x)) is ε-close to this by the
quasirandomness of q. This completes the proof.
    The following fact shows another connection between a graphing and its associated Bernoulli
graphing. We say that two graphings are bi-locally isomorphic if there exists a third graphing that
has local isomorphisms into both. The construction of the Bernoulli lift implies that every graphing
is bi-locally isomorphic to its Bernoulli graphing. Since by the definition of the Bernoulli graphing,
two graphings are locally equivalent if and only if they have the same Bernoulli graphing, we get
the following more explicit characterization:

Proposition 7.11 Two graphings are locally equivalent if and only if they are bi-locally isomorphic.

    To prove this proposition, it suffices to show that bi-local isomorphism is a transitive relation.
This takes some work which we do not discuss here; for the details, we refer the reader to [24].
   Let us turn to graph sequences. Every locally convergent graph sequence determines a unique
involution-invariant distribution and through this, a Bernoulli graphing. One expects that among
sequences with the same local limit, a sequence with the least possible global structure would con-
verge to the Bernoulli graphing in the local-global sense. As a special case, the following conjecture
was popularized by us in the past few years: Let Gn be a random d-regular graph on n vertices (if d is
odd, then we only consider even values of n). Then (Gn )∞ n=1 is a Bernoulli sequence with probability
one. In other words, the limit object is the Bernoulli graphing produced from the d-regular tree. A
very recent paper of Gamarnik and Sudan [18] disproves this conjecture.
   The following weaker conjecture remains unsolved:

Conjecture 7.12 A growing sequence of random d-regular graphs is local-global convergent with
probability one.

    We don’t know whether for d ≥ 3, the Bernoulli graphing corresponding to the d-regular tree is
the local-global limit of any graph sequence.


8     Joins and maximal graphings
We show that every weak equivalence class of graphings contains a maximal member. For this, we
introduce a direct product-like construction.

                                                      15
Lemma 8.1 Let G, G1 , G2 , . . . be graphings and let φi : V (Gi ) → V (G) be local isomorphisms. Then
there exists a graphing H and local isomorphisms ψi : V (H) → V (Gi ) and ξ : V (H) → V (G) such
that φi ◦ ψi = ξ.

   We call H a join of the graphings Gi relative to the common “factor” G.

   Proof. Let (X, ν) be the underlying space of G, and let (Xi , νi ) be the underlying space of Gi .
                                                 Q
First, consider the cartesian product space U = i Xi . Let ψi : U → Xi be the coordinate maps,
and consider the “diagonal” ∆ = {x ∈ U : ψi (φi (x)) = ψj (φj (x))for all i, j ∈ N}. By this definition,
the map ξ = ψi ◦ φi |U is independent of i.
   We note that ∆ is nonempty; in fact, ξ(∆) has measure 1 in G. Indeed, the facts that φi is
measure preserving and the space Xi is standard imply that φi (Xi ) is a measurable subset of X of
measure 1. Hence so is the set W = ∩i φi (Xi ). For any x ∈ W and any choice yi ∈ φ−1   i (x), we have
y = (yi , y2 , . . . ) ∈ U and ξ(y) = x. The cartesian product graph H′ = i Gi , defined by
                                                                         Q

                    Y
        V (H′ ) =       V (Gi )   E(H′ ) = {(x, y) : (ψi (x), ψi (y)) ∈ E(Gi ) for all i = 1, 2, . . . },
                    i

is not locally finite in general, but the induced subgraph H = H′ [∆] is:

Claim 2 When restricted to any connected component of H, every coordinate map ψi gives an
isomorphism between this connected component of H and a connected component of Gi . Consequently,
all degrees of H are bounded by d.

   Let x ∈ ∆, and consider the connected component L of H containing x, the connected component
J of G containing ξ(x), and the connected component Ji of Gi containing ψi (x). The map φi is a
local isomorphism, and hence it gives an isomorphism between Ji and J. Let ζi : V (J) → V (Ji ) be
the inverse of this map, and define ζ(y) = (ζ1 (y), ζ2 (y), . . . ) for y ∈ V (J). It is straightforward to
check that ζ is an embedding of J into H, and that there are no further edges of H incident with
the nodes of ζ(V (J)). Hence ζ(J) = L. This proves the Claim.
                                                                   Q
   We define a Polish space Y on ∆ by restricting the product space i Xi to ∆. It is not hard to
check that H is a Borel graph on Y .
   Next, we define a measure on Y . Let Ai ⊆ Xi be Borel sets so that only a finite number of them
are proper subsets. Let σi (B) = νi (Ai ∩ φ−1
                                           i (B)) for every Borel subset B ⊆ X, and consider the
Radon-Nikodym derivative fi = dσi /dν. Define
                                                      Z
                                µ(A1 × A2 × · · · ) =   f1 f2 . . . dν.                      (5)
                                                             X

It is not hard to check that µ extends from these boxes to a probability measure on all Borel sets in
∆ (in ergodic theory, this construction is called the relatively independent joining of the measures
νi over the common factor ν; see e.g. [9], Lemma 6.2 for a detailed description of this construction
for two factors). It is easy to see that every coordinate map ψi is measure preserving as a map from
(Y, µ) → (X, ν).

Claim 3 The measure µ, as a measure on the Borel graph H, is involution invariant.


                                                      16
    To prove this, it suffices to construct a measure σ ∗ on Y × Y that is concentrated on E(H) and
                                                  Z
                                      ∗
                                     σ (A × B) =     eH (x, B) dµ(x).                            (6)
                                                    A

Since the Gi are graphings, we know that there are measures ηi∗ on the Borels sets of Xi × Xi ,
and η ∗ on the Borels sets of X × X, related similarly to the measures νi and ν. The space Y × Y
is the cartesian product of the spaces Xi × Xi , and the maps φi define measure preserving maps
φi × φi : (Xi × Xi , ηi∗ ) → (X, η ∗ ). We define a measure σ ∗ similarly to (5) above. It is easy to check
that σ ∗ satisfies (6) and it is concentrated on E(H).
   Thus we know that H is a graphing, and the maps ψi : V (H) → V (Gi ) and ξ are local automor-
phisms.

Theorem 8.2 In every local equivalence class C of graphings there is a largest one in the local-global
partial order.

    Proof. Let Qr,k denote the union of the sets QG,r,k , where G ∈ C. There is a countable set of
graphings F = {G1 , G2 , . . . } in the equivalence class such that ∪i QGi ,r,k is dense in Qr,k for every r
and k. It is enough to find a graphing that is larger than every Bernoulli lift Gi+ in the local-global
partial order.
   Let B be the Bernoulli graphing in C. As shown in Section 7, there are local isomorphisms
φi : V (Gi+ ) → V (B). By Lemma 8.1, there is a graphing H and there are local isomorphisms
H → Gi+ . This implies that H is above any of the Gi+ in the local-global partial order.


9     Non-standard graphings
An alternative proof of Theorem 3.2 can be based on the ultraproduct method of Elek and Szegedy
[17]. Let (Gi )∞
               i=1 be an arbitrary graph sequence of maximum degree at most d. Let ω be a non-
principal ultrafilter on N. Let G denote the ultraproduct of the graph sequence. The vertex set V
of G is the ultraproduct of the vertex sets Vi of Gi and the edge set E ⊂ V × V is the ultraproduct
of the edge sets Ei ⊂ Vi × Vi of Gi . The graph G has maximum degree at most d, since this property
is expressible by a first order formula. We can also construct a σ-algebra A on V and a probability
measure µ on V which is the ultralimit of the uniform distributions on the sets Vi . It is not hard to
check that G satisfies the graphing axiom (1).
   If (Gi )∞
           i=1 is a locally convergent graph sequence, then G has neighborhood frequencies that are
the limits of the neighborhood frequencies of the graphs Gi . If (Gi )∞
                                                                      i=1 is locally-globally convergent,
then QG,r,k is the Hausdorff limit of the sets QGi ,r,k .
   However, this does not directly prove Theorem 3.2, since (V, µ) is not a separable probability
space. One can complete the proof by choosing an appropriate separable sub-sigma-algebra of G
which preserves the graphing structure. We omit the details here.
    An attractive feature of ultralimit graphings is that the sets QG,r,k are all closed. It is not clear
if there is a standard graphing representation of the limit of a convergent sequence with this stronger
property.

                                                    17
Question 9.1 Let (Gn )∞
                      n=1 be a local-global convergent sequence of graphs. Is there a graphing G
that represents the limit with the property that QG,r,k are all closed?


10      Hyperfinite graphs and graphings
For a graph G, we define τq (G) as the smallest t such that deleting t appropriate nodes, every
connected component of the remaining graph has at most q nodes. We say that a sequence (Gn )∞
                                                                                            n=1
of finite graphs is (q, ε)-hyperfinite if lim inf n τq (Gn )/|V (Gn )| ≤ ε. We say that (Gn )∞
                                                                                             n=1 is hyperfinite
                                                     ∞
if for every ε > 0, there is a q such that (Gn )n=1 is (q, ε)-hyperfinite. We can define hyperfiniteness
of a graphing G on underlying space X similarly: let τq (G) denote the infimum of numbers δ ≥ 0
such that we can delete a Borel set S ⊆ X with measure δ so that every connected component of the
remaining graphing has at most q nodes. We say that a graphing G is (q, ε)-hyperfinite if τq (G) ≤ ε,
and we say that G is hyperfinite if for every ε > 0, there is a q such that G is (q, ε)-hyperfinite. Since
we are talking about graphs with bounded degree, we could replace deleting nodes by deleting edges
in the definitions of hyperfiniteness.
    Hyperfiniteness in different settings was introduced by different people (see Kechris and Miller
[22], Elek [15], Schramm [28]). Schramm proved that a locally convergent sequence of graphs is hyper-
finite if and only if its limit is hyperfinite. This does not hold for (q, ε)-hyperfiniteness for a fixed pair
q and ε. As an easy example, a sequence of random d-regular graphs tend to a limiting involution-
invariant distribution (concentrated on the infinite d-regular tree) that is (1, 1/2)-hyperfinite, while
the sequence is not. On the other hand, a local-global convergent sequence of graphs behaves nicer:

Proposition 10.1 Let a sequence (Gn )∞   n=1 of finite graphs converge to a graphing G in the local-
                        ∞
global sense. Then (Gn )n=1 is (q, ε)-hyperfinite if and only if G is (q, ε)-hyperfinite.

Proof. A finite graph G satisfies τq (G) ≤ ε|V (G)| if and only if it has a 2-coloring c such that
PG,k,r [c](c(root) = 1) ≤ ε and PG,k,r [c](B) = 0 for every colored r-ball B that contains a connected
all-blue subgraph with k + 1 nodes. A graphing G satisfies τq (G) ≤ ε if and only if for every ε′ > ε, it
has a 2-coloring c such that PG,k,r [c](c(root) = 1) ≤ ε′ and PG,k,r [c](B) = 0 for every colored r-ball
B that contains a connected all-blue subgraph with k + 1 nodes. The proposition follows by the
definition of local-global convergence to a graphing.

    The following important property of hyperfiniteness is closely related to the results of Schramm
[28] and Benjamini, Schramm and Shapira [7]. It can be derived using the graph partitioning
algorithm of Hassidim, Kelner, Nguyen and Onak [20]; a direct proof is given in [24].

Proposition 10.2 Hyperfiniteness is invariant under local equivalence.

   Together with Proposition 10.1, this implies the above mentioned result of Schramm that a
locally convergent sequence of graphs is hyperfinite if and only if its limit is hyperfinite. We note
that (q, ε)-hyperfiniteness for a fixed q and ε is not invariant under local equivalence, which is shown,
for example, by the local-global limits of random d-regular graphs and of random d-regular bipartite
graphs. Our main result about hyperfinite graphings is a strengthening of Corollary 7.7.


                                                      18
Theorem 10.3 Every atom-free hyperfinite graphing G is locally-globally equivalent to its Bernoulli
graphing.

     Proof. By Corollary 7.7, BG ≺ G. It remains to show that G ≺ BG . In other words, for every
coloring of G, we have to find a coloring of BG with almost the same local statistics.
    Let (X, ν) be the underlying space of G, let c : X → [k] be a measurable coloring, and let us
fix a radius r ∈ N and an ε > 0. Let νB denote the measure of BG , and set ε1 = ε/(8(d + 1)r ).
By Proposition 10.2, the Bernoulli graphing BG of a hyperfinite graphing G is also hyperfinite. Let
S ⊂ G[0, 1] be a subset such that νB (S) ≤ ε1 and every connected component of G[0, 1]\S has at most
n nodes. Let m ∈ N, and define the coloring b : G[0, 1] → [m] × {0, 1} by b(x) = (⌈w(o)m⌉, 1S (x))
where x = (G, o, w). Choosing m large enough, we may assume that the set S ′ of points x for which
NBG ,r (x) contains two points with the same color has measure at most ε1 . Note that νB (S ∪S ′ ) ≤ 2ε1
and all points of BG \ (S ∪ S ′ ) are contained in connected components that have at most n vertices,
and whose nodes are colored differently by b.
     On the other hand, by Corollary 7.7 we have BG ≺ G which implies that there is a coloring
 ∗
b : X → [m] × {0, 1} such that

                                      dvar (PG,n [b∗ ], PBG ,n [b]) ≤ ε1 .

It follows that there are subsets T ⊆ G[0, 1] and T ′ ⊆ X with νB (T ) = ν(T ′ ) ≤ 4ε1 such that the
following conditions hold:

 (a) All points of BG \ T are contained in connected components that have at most n vertices and
       whose nodes are colored differently by b, and the same holds for the connected components of
       G \ T ′ with coloring b∗ ;

 (b) Furthermore, for every ([m] × {0, 1})-colored connected graph H with at most n vertices, the
       measure of points in components isomorphic to H (as colored graphs) is the same in BG \ T
       and G \ T ′ . Let VH (BG \ T ) and VH (G \ T ′ ) be these two sets.

     Let C be a connected component of G \ T ′ . Since the vertices of C are colored differently by
b∗ , there is a (unique) function fC : [m] × {0, 1} → [k] such that c = fC ◦ b∗ on the nodes of C.
This splits every set VH (G \ T ′ ) into at most k 2m measurable sets VH,f (G \ T ′ ) (indexed by functions
f : [m] × {0, 1} → [k]) that are unions of components of G \ T ′ .
    Split VH (BG \ T ) into sets VH,f (BG \ T ) so that each VH,f (BG \ T ) is a union of components
of BG \ T , and moreover νB (VH,f (BG \ T )) = ν(VH,f (G \ T ′ )). This is possible since there is no
probability mass on any component of BG .
    Let c′ be the measurable k-coloring of BG defined in the following way. Every v ∈ VH,f (BG \ T )
is colored by f ◦ b(v), and the points in T are all colored with one arbitrary color in [k]. Note
that the (conditional) local statistics of c′ obtained by picking a random v ∈ BG conditioned on
NBG ,r (v) ∩ T = ∅ is the same as the (conditional) local statistics of c obtained by picking a random
v ∈ G conditioned on NG,r (v) ∩ T ′ = ∅. The ν-measure of the vertices v ∈ G with NG,r (v) ∩ T ′ 6= ∅ is
at most ν(T ′ )(d + 1)r ≤ 4ε1 (d + 1)r . The same bound also holds for the νB -measure of the vertices



                                                      19
v ∈ BG with NBG ,r (v) ∩ T 6= ∅. Thus we have

                               dvar (PG,r [c], PBG ,r [c′ ]) ≤ 8(d + 1)r ε1 ≤ ε

which proves the theorem.

Remark 10.4 As the proof of Theorem 10.3 shows, G ≺ BG holds for every hyperfinite graphing G
(not necessarily atom-free).

   Now we are ready to state and prove our main theorem about convergence of hyperfinite graph
sequences. This theorem was proved independently by Elek [16].

Theorem 10.5 Every locally convergent hyperfinite graph sequence (Gn )∞
                                                                      n=1 with |V (Gn )| → ∞ is
a local-global convergent Bernoulli sequence.

   Proof. Let (Gi )∞
                   i=1 be a locally convergent hyperfinite sequence, and let µ be the involution-
invariant measure on G that is the local limit of the sequence. Since the Bernoulli graphing Bµ is
locally equivalent to the local limit of (Gi )∞
                                              i=1 , Proposition 10.2 implies that it is hyperfinite.
   To prove the theorem, assume by contradiction that (Gi )∞     i=1 does not converge in the local-
global sense to Bµ . Then it has a local-global convergent subsequence whose limit graphing G is not
local-global equivalent to BG = Bµ . By Remark 7.5 the condition |V (Gn )| → ∞ implies that G is
atom-free. This however contradicts Theorem 10.3.

Corollary 10.6 Local-global convergence is equivalent to local convergence when restricted to grow-
ing hyperfinite graph sequences.


11     Graphings as operators and expander graphings
Let G be a Borel graph on the probability space (X, µ) with all degrees at most d. If f : X → C is
a measurable function, then we define Gf : X → C by
                                                 X
                                     Gf (x) =          f (v).
                                                   (x,v)∈E(G)

It takes a short calculation to show that if G is a graphing, then it acts on the Hilbert space L2 (X, ν)
as a bounded self-adjoint operator. Let f : X → C be an arbitrary function in L2 (X, ν). Then
             Z                 Z      X                      Z
                |Gf (x)|2 dν ≤ d              |f (v)|2 dν = d |f (x)|2 deg(x) dν ≤ d2 kf k22 .
             x                  x   (x,v)∈E(G)

The equality in the above calculation uses the fact that G satisfies (1). It is easy to see that (1) is
equivalent to the statement that the action of G is self-adjoint in the sense that hGf, gi = hf, Ggi
holds for every pair f, g of bounded measurable functions. This implies that the action of G is also
self-adjoint on L2 (X, ν). The Laplace operator corresponding to a graphing is defined as L = D − G
where Df (x) = f (x)deg(x). It is easy to check that
                                        Z
                             hLf, f i =            (f (v) − f (w))2 dη ∗                             (7)
                                            (v,w)∈E(G)


                                                     20
holds in L2 (X, ν) where η ∗ is defined in Section 3. Thus L is positive semidefinite .
   The theory of graphings is closely related to the theory of measure preserving systems (in a sense,
it generalizes ergodic theory). In particular, one can define the notion of ergodicity. A graphing G
is ergodic if there is no measurable partition of the vertex set X into positive measure sets X1 , X2
such that there is no edge between X1 and X2 , or equivalently such that X1 is a union of connected
components of G. Note that graphings, when defined on an uncountable set, are never connected as
graphs and so the notion of ergodicity is a good replacement for the notion of connectivity. Equation
(7) implies the following analogue of a well known theorem from ergodic theory about the Koopman
representation (see [19]).

Proposition 11.1 Let L be the Laplace operator corresponding to the graphing G. The multiplicity
of the eigenvalue 0 of L as an operator on L2 (X, ν) is 1 if and only if G is ergodic.

   Graphings offer new phenomena. Ergodicity is equivalent to saying that ν(N1 (S)) > ν(S) for
every set S with 0 < ν(S) ≤ 1/2 (Here N1 (S) = ∪x∈S NG,1 (x)). Positive expansion is a natural
strengthening of this condition. We say that a graphing G is a c-expander if for every Borel set
S ⊆ X with 0 < ν(S) ≤ 1/2, we have ν(N1 (S)) ≥ (1 + c)ν(S). We say that a graphing G is an
expander if it is a c-expander for some c > 0.
   Let us restrict our attention to d-regular graphs and graphings. Let (Gn )∞
                                                                             n=1 be a sequence of
d-regular graphs that are expanders with expansion c > 0. Let us select a local-global convergent
subsequence. It is easy to see that its limit is a d-regular graphing that is also a c-expander.
    We can generalize spectral conditions for expanders to graphings. Let us define spectral gap of a
d-regular graphing by
                             gap(G) = inf{hLf, f i : hf, f i = 1, hf, 1i = 0}
(note that it does not matter whether we take the infimum over f ∈ L2 (X) or f ∈ L∞ (X)). The
following analogue of the theorems of Alon and Milman [4] and Alon [3] on expanders can be proved
along the same lines:

Proposition 11.2 Suppose that a d-regular graphing G is a c-expander. Then c2 /(2d) ≤ gap(G) ≤
2c. In particular, a graphing is an expander if and only if its spectral gap is positive.

   An easy calculation shows that if G1 and G2 are local-global equivalent, then gap(G1 ) = gap(G2 ).
In other words gap(G) is a local-global invariant quantity. This follows from the classical fact that
measurable functions can be arbitrarily well approximated by step functions. It is also easy to see
that gap(G) is not invariant under local equivalence.
   One must be careful though: the spectral gap gap(G) is a lower bound on the eigenvalues of G
belonging to non-constant eigenfunctions of G, but it may not be the infimum of such eigenvalues.
For example, the Bernoulli graphing of a 2-way infinite path is ergodic but not an expander, and its
Laplacian has no non-constant eigenfunction.


12     Graphings and local algorithms
Local algorithms and factor of i.i.d. processes. Elek and Lippner [13] formulate a correspon-

                                                   21
dence principle between graphings and local algorithms. We can make this more precise using the
notion of Bernoulli graphings:

Measurable graph theoretic statements for Bernoulli graphings correspond to randomized local algo-
rithms for finite graphs.

   Let us consider an example. Let T be the d-regular tree with a distinguished root and let Ω be
the compact space [0, 1]V (T ) . Let f : Ω → [k] be any measurable function which depends only on
the isomorphism class of the labeled rooted tree. In other words f is invariant under the action of
the root preserving automorphism group of T . Using the function f , we create a random model
of k colorings of T in the following way. First we produce a random element ω ∈ Ω by putting
independent random weights from [0, 1] on the vertices of T , and then for every v ∈ V (T ), we define
the color c(v) as the value of f on the labeled rooted tree obtained from T by assigning labels ω
and placing the root on v. We say that f is the rule of the coloring process c. Such processes on
the tree are called factor of i.i.d. processes. We say that the rule f has radius r if it depends only
on the labels on vertices of T that are of distance at most r from the root.
   The following rule (of radius 1) is a classical method to construct an independent set of nodes
in a graph (see Alon and Spencer [5]). Let f : Ω → {0, 1} be the function which returns 1 if and
only if the label on the root is smaller than the labels on all the neighboring vertices. It is clear
that with probability one the corresponding random coloring c is the characteristic function of some
independent set on T . We can view c as a randomized algorithm which produces an independent
set of points of density 1/(d + 1). Since the rule f has radius 1, it can also be applied to a finite
d-regular graph G. Let us put random labels from [0, 1] on the vertices of G, and then evaluate the
rule f at each vertex using only the neighborhood of radius 1. We get a random {0, 1} coloring of
V (G) such that 1’s form an independent set. Such algorithms (corresponding to a rule of bounded
radius) are called local algorithms. On the other hand, we can view f as the characteristic function
of a single (non-random) independent set in the Bernoulli graphing G corresponding to the tree T
(that is, G := Bµ where µ is the Dirac probability measure on the point T ∈ G). The vertex set
of G is G[0, 1], but in G almost every vertex is represented by an element in [0, 1]V (T ) , and so we
can evaluate the function f for almost every point. It is clear now that f −1 (1) is an independent
measurable set in G.
  A general definition of factor of i.i.d. processes can be obtained through Bernoulli graphings.
Let µ be an involution-invariant measure on G, and let Bµ be the corresponding Bernoulli graphing
on G[0, 1]. Let f : G[0, 1] → [k] be a Borel function. Then the involution-invariant measure µB,f on
G[k] has the property that it projects to µ when the labels on the vertices are forgotten. In other
words µB,f puts a k-coloring process on the graphs generated by µ. The measure µB,f is called a
factor of i.i.d. process on µ. The rule of the process is the function f . We say that the rule f has
radius r if f (G1 ) = f (G2 ) whenever the balls of radius r in G1 and G2 are isomorphic as rooted
labeled graphs.
   We can approximate the rule f with an arbitrary precision ε with another rule f ′ of finite radius
r (which depends on ε) in the sense that ν(x|f (x) 6= f ′ (x)) ≤ ε. An advantage of the finite radius
approximation is that it can be used for local algorithms on finite graphs. Let G be a finite graph


                                                 22
of maximal degree at most d, and let us put random labels from [0, 1] on the vertices in G. Then
f ′ defines a new coloring of G such that the color of a vertex v is computed using f ′ for the labeled
neighborhood of radius r of v.
Nondeterministic property testing. The connection between the two convergence notions can
be illuminated by the following algorithmic considerations. Given a (very large) graph G with
bounded degree, we use the following sampling method to gain information: we select randomly and
uniformly a node of G, and explore its neighborhood of radius r. We can repeat this t times. There
are a number of algorithmic tasks (parameter estimation, property testing) that can be studied in
this framework; we only sketch a simple version of property testing, and its connection to local-global
convergence.
   It will be convenient to introduce the edit distance for graphs with bounded degree. For two
graphs on the same node set V (G) = V (G′ ), we define
                                                    1
                                 d1 (G, G′ ) =           |E(G)△E(G′ )|.
                                                 |V (G)|
For a graph property P, let P−ε = {G ∈ G : d1 (G, P) > ε}.
   We say that the graph property P is testable if for every ε > 0, there are integers r, t ≥ 1 such
that given any graph G that is large enough, taking t samples of radius r as described above, we can
guess whether the graph has property P: if G ∈ P, then our guess should be “YES” with probability
at least 2/3; if G ∈ P−ε , then the answer should be “NO” with probability at least 2/3. If P is
testable, then a locally convergent graph sequence cannot contain infinitely many graphs from both
P and P−ε .
   Now let us say that P is nondeterministically testable if there is an integer k ≥ 1, and a testable
property Q of k-colored graphs with bounded degree, such that G ∈ P if and only if there is
a k-coloring c such that (G, c) ∈ Q. This k-coloring is a “witness” for our conclusion. As an
example, the property “G is the disjoint union of two graphs with at least |V (G)|/1000 nodes” is
not testable, but it is nondeterministically testable (a witness is a 2-coloring with no edge between
the 2 colors); so these two notions are different (in contrast to the case of dense graphs [27]). If
P is nondeterministically testable, then a local-global convergent graph sequence cannot contain
infinitely many graphs from both P and P−ε .


13     Concluding remarks
Local-global equivalence and limit representation. We have seen a characterization of local
equivalence of two graphings (Proposition 7.11). Is there a similar characterization of local-global
equivalence?
   Does every graphing represent the limit of a local-global convergent graph sequence? This is
stronger than the Aldous–Lyons conjecture, but perhaps there is a counterexample. We can mention
two possible counterexamples suggested by our results.
   Can a d-regular graphing be a better expander than any finite d-regular graph? Such a graphing
would certainly be a counterexample. It is not easy, however, to compute the expansion rate of even
very simple graphings, like the Bernoulli tree.

                                                    23
   Is every graphing (d+ 1)-edge-colorable in a Borel way? If a graphing is the local-global limit of a
sequence of finite simple graphs, then these graphs can be (d + 1)-edge-colored by Vizing’s Theorem,
and it is not hard to see that such an edge-coloring can be transferred to the limit graphing.

Even finer limit notions. Limit graphings can represent even finer information than local-global
convergence. Consider the following examples. Let 0 < a < 1 be an irrational number, and consider
the following three graphings: (a) Ca is obtained by connecting every point x ∈ [0, 1] to the two
points x ± a (mod 1); (b) Ca′ consists of two disjoint copies of Ca (both with measure 1/2); (c) Ca′′
is obtained by taking two copies of [0, 1] (call them upper and lower), each with mass 1/2, and
connecting every lower point x ∈ [0, 1] to the two upper points x ± a (mod 1).
   These three graphings are locally isomorphic, and either one of them represents the local-global
limit of the sequence of cycles. But they are “different”: there is no measure preserving isomorphism
between them, and this has combinatorial reasons. The graphing Ca′ is “disconnected” (non-ergodic),
while Ca′′ is “bipartite”: it has a partition into two sets with positive measure such that every edge
connects the two classes. The graphing Ca does not have any partition with either one of these
properties (even if we allow an exceptional subset of measure 0). This follows from basic ergodic
theory.
   It seems that the graphing Ca should represent the limit of odd cycles, Ca′ should represent the
limit of graphs consisting of a pair of odd cycles, while Ca′′ should represent the limit of even cycles.
This would correspond to a finer ordering of graphings, where we say that say that a graphon G2
is “finer” that a graphing G2 if QG1 ,r,k ⊆ QG2 ,r,k for every r, k ≥ 1. A theory of convergence that
would explain these examples has not been worked out, however.
   We know [10] that local convergence is equivalent to right-convergence where the target graph
is in a small neighborhood of the looped complete graph with all edge-weights 1. Can local-global
convergence be characterized by, or at least related to, some stronger form of right convergence?


References
 [1] D. Aldous, R. Lyons: Processes on Unimodular Random Networks, Electron. J. Probab. 12,
    Paper 54 (2007), 1454–1508.

 [2] M. Abert, B. Weiss: Bernoulli actions are weakly contained in any free action, Ergodic theory
     and dynamical systems, to appear.

 [3] N. Alon: Eigenvalues and expanders, Combinatorica 6 (1986), 83–96.

 [4] N. Alon and V. D. Milman: λ1 , isoperimetric inequalities for graphs and superconcentrators,
    J. Combinatorial Theory B 38 (1985), 73–88.

 [5] N. Alon, J. Spencer: The Probabilistic Method, Wiley–Interscience, 2000.

 [6] I. Benjamini and O. Schramm: Recurrence of distributional limits of finite planar graphs,
     Electronic J. Probab. 6 (2001), paper no. 23, 1–13.




                                                   24
 [7] I. Benjamini, O. Schramm, A. Shapira: Every Minor-Closed Property of Sparse Graphs is
    Testable, Advances in Math. 223 (2010), 2200–2218.

 [8] B. Bollobas, O. Riordan: Sparse graphs: Metrics and random models, Rand. Struc. Alg. 39,
     1–38.

 [9] C. Borgs, J. Chayes and L. Lovász: Moments of Two-Variable Functions and the Uniqueness
    of Graph Limits, Geom. Func. Anal. 19 (2010), 1597–1619.

[10] C. Borgs, J.T. Chayes, J. Kahn and L. Lovász: Left and right convergence of graphs with
    bounded degree, Random Struc. Alg. 42 (2013), 1–28.

[11] C. Borgs, J.T. Chayes, L. Lovász, V.T. Sós, and K. Vesztergombi: Convergent graph sequences
    I: Subgraph frequencies, metric properties, and testing, Advances in Math. 219 (2008), 1801–
    1851.

[12] C. Borgs, J.T. Chayes, L. Lovász, V.T. Sós, and K. Vesztergombi: Convergent graph sequences
    II: Multiway Cuts and Statistical Physics, Annals of Math. 176 (1912), 151–219.

[13] G. Elek and G. Lippner: Borel oracles. An analytical approach to constant-time algorithms,
    Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 138 (2010), 2939–2947.

[14] G. Elek: On limits of finite graphs, Combinatorica 27 (2007), 503–507.

[15] G. Elek: The combinatorial cost, Enseign. Math. 53 (2007), 225–235.

[16] G. Elek: Finite graphs and amenability, J. of Func. Anal. 263 (2012), 2593–2614.

[17] G. Elek, B. Szegedy: A measure-theoretic approach to the theory of dense hypergraphs, Adv.
     in Math. 231 (2012), 1731–1772.

[18] D. Gamarnik and M. Sudan: Limits of local algorithms over sparse random graphs, http:
    //arxiv.org/abs/1304.1831

[19] Eli Glasner: Ergodic Theory via Joinings, Amer. Math. Soc. (2003).)

[20] A. Hassidim, J.A. Kelner, H.N. Nguyen, K. Onak: Local Graph Partitions for Approximation
     and Testing, in: FOCS ’09, 50th Ann. IEEE Symp. on Found. Comp. Science (2009), 22–31.

[21] A.S. Kechris: Global aspects of ergodic group actions, Math. Surveys and Monographs 160,
    Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I. (2010).

[22] A. Kechris and B.D. Miller: Topics in orbit equivalence theory, Lecture Notes in Mathematics
     1852. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2004.

[23] A. Kechris, S. Solecki and S. Todorcevic: Borel chromatic numbers, Advances in Mathematics
    141 (1999) 1–44.

[24] L. Lovász: Large networks and graph limits, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I. (2012).


                                                 25
[25] L. Lovász, B. Szegedy: Limits of dense graph sequences, J. Comb. Theory B 96 (2006), 933–957.

[26] L. Lovász, B. Szegedy: Szemerédi’s Lemma for the analyst, Geom. Func. Anal. 17 (2007),
    252–270.

[27] L. Lovász, K. Vesztergombi: Nondeterministic graph property testing, Comb. Prob. and Com-
    put.

[28] O. Schramm: Hyperfinite graph limits, Elect. Res. Announce. Math. Sci. 15 (2008), 17–23.




                                                26
