                                              SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D.
                                             PROCESSES ON VERTEX-TRANSITIVE GRAPHS

                                                          ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG


                                                 Abstract. We prove that a measure on [−d, d] is the spectral
arXiv:1505.07412v2 [math.PR] 3 Sep 2016




                                                 measure of a factor of i.i.d. process on a vertex-transitive infinite
                                                 graph if and only if it is absolutely continuous with respect to the
                                                 spectral measure of the graph. Moreover, we show that the set of
                                                 spectral measures of factor of i.i.d. processes and that of d¯2 -limits
                                                 of factor of i.i.d. processes are the same.



                                          Keywords: factor of i.i.d.; Gaussian process, spectral measure.

                                                                        1. Introduction

                                              We consider invariant random processes on vertex transitive graphs
                                          that can be performed with ”randomized local” algorithms (factor of
                                          i.i.d. processes). The aim of the paper is characterizing the covariance
                                          structures of factor of i.i.d. processes, in terms of the absolute conti-
                                          nuity of their spectral measure with respect to the spectral measure of
                                          the graph.

                                          1.1. Factor of i.i.d. processes. Let G = (V (G), E(G)) be a vertex-
                                          transitive graph with countable vertex set V (G). We assign a random
                                          variable Xv to each v ∈ V (G). We get an invariant random process
                                          if the joint distribution is invariant under the automorphisms of G.
                                          These are the analogues of stationary processes on Z, and they may be
                                          interesting on their own right (Arnaud 1980, 1994).
                                             Among invariant random processes, we deal with factor of i.i.d. pro-
                                          cesses, see e.g. Elek and Lippner (2010), Hatami, Lovász and Szegedy
                                          (2014) or the paper of Lyons (2014) and the references therein. Re-
                                          sults of randomized local algorithms (or constant-time parallelized al-
                                          gorithms) belong to this class. Furthermore, factor of i.i.d. processes
                                          can be useful for ﬁnding large independent sets (Csóka, Gerencsér, Ha-
                                          rangi and Virág 2014, Harangi and Virág 2013, Hoppen and Wormald
                                          2013), matchings on nonamenable graphs (Lyons and Nazarov 2011,
                                          Csóka and Lippner 2012), colorings, other structures (Gaboriau and
                                          Lyons 2009, Kun 2013, Backhausz and Szegedy 2014). This family of
                                          processes may also be interesting from an ergodic theoretic point of
                                            Date: 2 September 2016.
                                            2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 60G15.
2                ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

view (Bowen 2010), as they are the factors of the Bernoulli shift. To
deﬁne factor of i.i.d. processes, loosely speaking, we start with indepen-
dent and identically distributed labels (from R) on the vertices. Then
each vertex gets a new label, depending on the labelled rooted graph
as it is seen from that vertex. The rule is ﬁxed, and it is the same for
all vertices. See Subsection 2.2 for the precise deﬁnition.

1.2. Spectral measures, covariance structures and d¯2 limit. We
assign a ﬁnite measure on R to invariant random processes on G, which
is the spectral measure of the process. (Throughout the paper, we
always consider Borel measures.) This measure is the spectral measure
of the graphing associated to the process (Section 2.3). This is also
related to the covariance structure of the process, as the following is
satisﬁed for a process X:
                                         Z
             k              k
        E([A X]o , Xo ) = hA δo , cX iG = tk dµX (t)   (k ≥ 0),

where A is the adjacency operator, cX : V → R is the covariance
structure assigning cov(Xo , Xv ) to each vertex v, and µX is the spectral
measure of X.

    Our goal is characterizing the set of spectral measures of factor of
i.i.d. processes. As we will see, the same characterization holds for
d¯2 -limits of factor of i.i.d. processes. The following metric is based on
              ¯
Ornstein’s d-metric     (see e.g. Lyons 2014).
Definition 1. The d¯2 -distance of the random invariant processes X, X ′
(with marginals having finite second moments) is defined as follows.
                                            d        d
      d¯2 (X, X ′ )2 = min{E (Yo − Yo′ )2 : Y = X, Y ′ = X ′ ,
                                             (Y, Y ′ ) is invariant}.

   If the graph is the d-regular tree (throughout the paper, we denote
by Td the inﬁnite d-regular tree), the spectral measure equals to the
Fourier transform of the covariance structure, see e.g. Cartier (1973),
Arnaud (1980, 1994), Figà-Talamanca and Picardello (1982). On the
other hand, in Backhausz, Szegedy and Virág (2015) a uniform expo-
nential bound was proved for the decay of the correlation sequence
of a factor of i.i.d. process, and the pointwise closure of the possible
correlation sequences was described in the case G = Td (d ≥ 3).

1.3. Main results. Our main result is the following theorem, which
characterizes the spectral measures of factor of i.i.d. processes, linear
factor of i.i.d. processes (see Deﬁnition 13 and 14) and d¯2 -limits of
factor of i.i.d. processes (Deﬁnition 1).
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                  3

Theorem 2. Fix an infinite vertex-transitive graph G. Suppose that all
processes below have marginals with mean 0 and finite second moment.
The following are equivalent for a finite (Borel) measure on R.
   (i) It is absolutely continuous with respect to the spectral measure ν
of the graph G.
   (ii) It is the spectral measure of some linear factor of i.i.d. process.
   (iii) It is the spectral measure of some factor of i.i.d. process.
   (iv) It is the spectral measure of some limit of factor of i.i.d. process
with respect to the d¯2 -distance.
   (v) It is the spectral measure of some invariant process which is the
¯
d2 -limit of processes with spectral measures satisfying (i).

   The equivalence of (iii) and (iv) shows that the conjecture about d¯2 -
limits of factor of i.i.d. processes can not be refuted based on spectral
measures or covariance structures.
Remark 3. The proof shows that the family of processes with spectral
measures absolutely continuous with respect to any ﬁxed measure on
[−1, 1] is closed under d¯2 -convergence.

  Based on this theorem, we give the characterization of spectral mea-
sures of processes that are limits of factor of i.i.d. processes in distri-
bution.
Theorem 4. Fix an infinite vertex-transitive graph G. Suppose that all
processes below have marginals with mean 0 and finite second moment.
The following are equivalent for a finite (Borel) measure µ on R.
   (i) Its support is contained in the support of the spectral measure of
G, that is, supp(µ) ⊆ supp(ν).
   (ii) It is the spectral measure of the weak limit of some linear factor
of i.i.d. processes.
   (iii) It is the spectral measure of the weak limit of some factor of
i.i.d. process.

   As for the d-regular tree, Theorem 5.1 of Backhausz, Szegedy and
Virág (2014) gives a description of the pointwise closure of the correla-
tion sequences of factor of i.i.d. processes, which shows the equivalence
of (i) and (iii) in Theorem 4 after some reformulation.
Remark 5. The family of processes that can be modelled on random d-
regular graphs in an appropriate sense (see e.g. Backhausz and Szegedy
(2014)) is strictly wider than the limit of factor of i.i.d. processes; for
example, for large d, the independence ratio is twice as large as the
proportion of an independent set that can be constructed with factor of
i.i.d. (Gamarnik and Sudan 2014, Rahman and Virág 2014). However,
4                   ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

the possible covariance structures are the same for the two families of
invariant random processes, and the results remain valid.

1.4. Applications.

Process spectrum. The aim of this section is describing the set of points
that can be included in the spectrum of an invariant random process.
Definition 6 (Process spectrum of a graph). Let G be a d-regular
vertex transitive graph. Its process spectrum is defined as follows:
                              [
                    psp(G) =     supp(µX ) ⊆ [−d, d],
                                 X

where the union is for all invariant random processes on G with marginals
having finite variance. The process spectral radius ̺+p (G) is defined by
sup{x : x ∈ psp(G), x < d}.

  If d is ﬁxed, one can ask whether there √   are d-regular graphs with
process spectral radius arbitrarily close to 2 d − 1.
Theorem 7. Let µ be a finite measure with supp(µ) ⊆ psp(G). Then
there exists an invariant random process X with spectral measure µ.

   For the d-regular tree it is known that the process spectrum is [−d, d]
(Arnaud 1980,√1994, Lasser
                         √      and Leitner 1990), while the spectrum of
the tree is [−2 d − 1, 2 d − 1]. In particular, Gaussian wave functions
(see the deﬁnition below) exist for all λ ∈ [−d, d] (Csóka, Gerencsér,
Harangi and Virág 2014, Figà-Talamanca and Nebbia 1991).
   We will also prove the following statement about the connection of
process spectrum and Kazhdan’s property (T ) (see e.g. Bekka, de la
Harpe and Valette 2008). This also shows that the behavior of process
spectral radius and the behavior of spectral radius with respect to
tensor product of graphs are diﬀerent (take the product of two graphs,
one with process spectral radius equal to d, and the other one less than
d).
Proposition 8. Let H be a finitely generated infinite group, and G
its Cayley graph with some set of generators. Then the following are
equivalent.
     (i) H has Kazhdan’s property (T ).
    (ii) The process spectral radius ̺+
                                      p (G) is less than d.


d¯2 -distance and total variation distance of the spectral measures. Dur-
ing the proof of the main theorem, we will show the following inequality
and orthogonality. The total variation distance of probability measures
will be denoted by dT V (·, ·). However, we will use the notion of total
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                     5

variation distance not only for probability measures:
                                         Z
                                       1
                     dT V (µ1 , µ2 ) =     |f − g|dκ,
                                       2
where f and g are the density functions of µ1 and µ2 with respect to
some common dominating measure κ.
  The Hellinger distance dH of measures µ, ν is deﬁned by
(1)                 d2H (µ, ν) = ||µ|| + ||ν|| − 2γ,
                        R√
where the quantity γ =       f gdκ is the Bhattacharyya coeﬃcient.
Proposition 9. Let X, Y be invariant random processes. Suppose that
E(Xo ) = E(Yo ) = 0 and the marginals of X have finite second moments.
(a) The following inequality holds:
  d¯22 (X, Y ) ≥ d2H (µX , µY )
                                   q                  2
                       2        2
               ≥ E(Xo ) + E(Yo ) −   E(Xo2 ) + E(Yo2 ) − 4d2T V (µX , µY )
                2d2T V (µX , µY )
           ≥                      .
               E(Xo2 ) + E(Yo2 )
(b) Let (X, Y ) be an invariant pair of random processes. Suppose that
    E(Xo ) = E(Yo ) = 0 and the marginals of X and Y have finite
    second moments. If µX and µY are singular measures, then
                                 E(Xo Yo ) = 0.


Linear factor of i.i.d. processes and d¯2 -metric. Proposition 9 implies
that Gaussian factor of i.i.d. processes are closed in the d¯2 -metric on
the d-regular tree.
Corollary 10. Let G = Td be the d-regular tree. Suppose that X (n) is
a sequence of Gaussian factor of i.i.d. processes such that X (n) → X
with respect to the d¯2 -distance as n → ∞. Then (the distribution of )
X is a Gaussian factor of i.i.d. process.

  In fact, we will prove this statement for arbitrary vertex-transitive
graphs, but for a smaller class of linear factor of i.i.d. processes (see
Deﬁnition 14 and Subsection 6.3).

Gaussian wave functions. As another application of the inequality in
Proposition 9, we will show that Gaussian wave functions are separated
from factor of i.i.d. processes with respect to the d¯2 -distance. A Gauss-
ian wave function with eigenvalue λ is an invariant Gaussian process
(Xv ) satisfying
             (AX)v = λXv almost surely for all v ∈ V (Td ).
6                ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

According to Theorem 4 of Harangi and Virág (2015), such a process
exists for all λ in the spectrum of the adjacency operator of G, but
it is not a factor of i.i.d. process if λ is the supremum of the spec-
trum. As for the d-regular tree G = Td (with d ≥ 3), Theorem 3 of
Csóka, Gerencsér, Harangi and Virág (2015) states that Gaussian wave
function (Xv ) exists for all λ ∈ [−d, d]. Theorem 4 of the same paper
says that (Xv ) is a weak limit of√factor of√i.i.d. processes if λ is in the
spectrum of the tree, i.e. in [−2 d − 1, 2 d − 1], but it is known that
it is not a factor of i.i.d. See also Corollary 3.3 of Lyons (2014), which
gives a 2-valued example for a process which is weak limit of factor of
i.i.d. but not factor of i.i.d.
    Proposition 9 will imply the following about wave functions.

Corollary 11. Let X be a Gaussian wave function corresponding to
λ ∈ [−d, d] (if it exists) with Var(Xo ) = 1 and E(Xo ) = 0.
(a) If X ′ is a Gaussian wave function corresponding to λ′ 6= λ with
    E(Xo′ ) = 0 and Var(Xo′ ) = 1, then√ they are orthogonal in every
    coupling; equivalently, d¯2 (X, X ′ ) = 2.
(b) If the spectral measure of G is absolutely continuous with respect to
    the Lebesgue measure, and Y is a limit of factor of i.i.d. processes
    in the d¯2 -distance with Var(Yo ) = 1, then
                                               √ they are orthogonal in
    every coupling; equivalently, d¯2 (X, Y ) = 2.

  In particular, Gaussian wave functions are never factor of i.i.d. pro-
cesses. Moreover, the metric space of processes with the d¯2 -distance is
not separable.



Gauss Markov processes. As an application of Theorem 2, we will show
the following characterization of factor of i.i.d. Gauss Markov processes
on G = Td . These are Gaussian processes which have the spatial
Markov property. The covariance structure is exponential in this case.
That is, for every Markov process there exist ̺ ∈ R such that

(2)                cov(Xo , Xv ) = ̺|v|    (v ∈ V (Td )),

where |v| denotes the distance of v from the root o.

Proposition 12. A Gauss Markov process is factor of i.i.d. process if
and only if
                 1
      |̺| ≤ √           holds, where ̺ is defined by equation (2).
                d−1
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                 7

Outline. The paper is built up as follows. In Section 2, we recall the
concept of a factor of i.i.d. process and spectral measures. The proofs
of Proposition 9, Theorem 2 and Theorem 4 may be found in Sec-
tions 3, 4, and 5 respectively. The last section contains the proofs of
the applications (process spectrum, d¯2 -limits of linear factor of i.i.d.
processes, Gaussian wave functions, Gaussian free ﬁeld, Gauss Markov
processes).

                          2. Preliminaries
  First we recall the deﬁnition of factor of i.i.d. processes for vertex-
transitive graphs. This section is based on Harangi and Virág (2015).

2.1. Invariant random processes and Gaussian processes. Let
G be a rooted graph with countable vertex set V (G), edge set E(G)
and root o ∈ V (G). We consider random processes indexed by the
vertices of the graph. That is, we assign a random variable Xv to each
v ∈ V (G).
   We say that a bijection Φ : V (G) → V (G) is an automorphism of G
if for all vertices u and v the following holds: (Φ(u), Φ(v)) ∈ E(G) if
and only if (u, v) ∈ E(G). The group of automorphisms of G is denoted
by Aut(G). The graph is vertex transitive if Aut(G) acts transitively
on V (G).
   The collection of random variables (Xv ), v ∈ V (G) is an invariant
random process on G if for any Φ ∈ Aut(G) the joint distribution of
(XΦ(v) ) is the same as the joint distribution of (Xv ).
   We say that a collection of random variables (Xv ), v ∈ V (G) is a
Gaussian process if their joint distribution is Gaussian (i.e. any ﬁnite
linear combination of them has Gaussian distribution) and they all have
mean 0. An invariant Gaussian process is a Gaussian process that is
invariant.

2.2. Factor of i.i.d. processes. Let G be a vertex transitive graph
and Ω = RV (G) . Let P be the product measure on Ω obtained from the
standard normal distribution on R. That is, if we assign independent
standard normal random variables Zv to the vertices v ∈ V (G), then
the collection of random variables (Zv ) is a random element of the
measure space (Ω, P ).
  A factor of i.i.d. process on G will be determined by a function
f ∈ L2 (Ω, P ) which is invariant under the root-preserving automor-
phisms of G. Given the independent standard normal random vari-
ables (Zu )u∈V (G) , we assign to each vertex v ∈ V (G) the value of f on
(ZΦ(u) )u∈V (G) where Φ is in Aut(G) taking v to the root. Notice that
this does not depend on the choice of Φ, because f is invariant under
the root-preserving automorphisms of G. We get an invariant random
8                ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

process (Xv )v∈V (G) this way. In addition, the only possibility to deﬁne
the process such that each Xu is determined from (Zv ) by a measurable
function and they are Aut(G)-equivariant (they commute with the nat-
ural action of Aut(G)) is to evaluate a measurable function f at each
vertex. See Section 3.2. of Harangi and Virág (2015) for the details.
On the other hand, since we will deal with the covariance structure of
the process, we need f to be in L2 (Ω, P ).

Linear factor of i.i.d. processes. Linear factor of i.i.d. processes will be
given by ℓ2 -functions on the vertex set of G. More precisely, ﬁrst we
deﬁne the ℓ2 -space of the graph by
                                         X                 
               2                                     2
              ℓ (G) = α : V (G) → R            α(v) < ∞ .
                                         v∈V (G)

In this space we have the inner product as usual:
                        X
             hα, βiG =       α(v)β(v)     (α, β ∈ ℓ2 (G)).
                        v∈V (G)

Definition 13 (Linear factor of i.i.d. process). We say that X is a
linear factor of i.i.d. process if its rule f is given by
                              X
                    f (ω) =         β(u)ωu       (ω ∈ Ω),
                           u∈V (G)

where β ∈ ℓ2 (G) and it is invariant under the root-preserving auto-
morphisms of G (that is, β(u) = β(Φ(u)) for all Φ ∈ Aut(G) with
Φ(o) = o).

   By Kolmogorov’s three-series theoremP the sum    in the deﬁnition is
                                                 2
convergent almost surely if and only if u∈V (G) β (u) < ∞. See Propo-
sition 3.3. of Harangi and Virág (2015) for more details.

Spherical linear factor of i.i.d. processes. We will also consider a special
class of linear factor of i.i.d. processes. In this case the coeﬃcients
belong to the ℓ2 -closure of the polynomials of the adjacency operator
of G. Let the adjacency operator A : ℓ2 (G) → ℓ2 (G) deﬁned by
                          X
            (Aβ)(v) =             β(u)      (v ∈ G, β ∈ ℓ2 (G)).
                       (u,v)∈E(G)

We denote by δo ∈ ℓ2 (G) the indicator function of the root. For each
polynomial p the function p(A)δo is a ﬁnitely supported function on
V (G), hence it is in ℓ2 (G). Let
                    
              L = p(A)δo : p is a polynomial ⊆ ℓ2 (G),
that is, the ℓ2 -closure of the functions given by the polynomials of A.
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                 9

Definition 14 (Spherical linear factor of i.i.d.). We say that X is a
spherical linear factor of i.i.d. process if its rule f is given by
                             X
                   f (ω) =         β(u)ωu        (ω ∈ Ω),
                           u∈V (G)

where β ∈ L.

  Note that for the regular tree G = Td every ﬁnitely supported radial
function on V (G) (i.e., the value depends only on the distance from the
root) is in the form p(A)δo for some polynomial p. Hence L = ℓ2 (Td ),
and every linear factor of i.i.d. process is spherical.

Linear factors. In the sequel, we will also consider ﬁnite linear factors
of any invariant process X. The deﬁnition is based on polynomials of
A, as follows.
Definition 15 (Linear factor of a process X). Let X be an invariant
random process and p a polynomial. By p(A)X we mean the linear
factor process defined by
                            X            
                [p(A)X]v =        p(A)δo (Φ(w))Xw ,
                             w∈V (G)

where Φ ∈ Aut(G) is any automorphism taking v to the root o.

  Since p(A)δo is a ﬁxed point of root-preserving automorphisms of G,
the deﬁnition does not depend on the choice of Φ.

2.3. Spectral measures.

Spectral measure of the graph. Let G be a vertex-transitive graph with
all vertices having degree d. Recall that δo ∈ ℓ2 (G) is the function that
is equal to 1 at the root and 0 everywhere else. The operator A is a
bounded self-adjoint operator. Therefore there exists a ﬁnite measure
ν on [−d, d] such that
                                       Z
(3)                        k
                        hA δo , δo iG = tk dν(t)

holds for every k ≥ 0. This is called the spectral measure of the graph at
the root (see e.g. Bordenave, Sen and Virág (2013), Abért, Thom and
Virág (2014) and the references therein). Notice that this is closely
related to the return probabilities of the random walk on the graph:
the left hand side is the number of returning paths of length k starting
from the root.
   When G = Td is the inﬁnite d-regular tree (d ≥ 3), then ν is the
Plancherel (or Kesten–McKay) measure (see e.g. Woess 2000), which
10                ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

has density function
               √                        h                  i
               d 4(d−1)−t2                    √        √
                                      t ∈ − 2 d − 1, 2 d − 1 ;
       h(t) = 2π d2 −t2
                    h(t) = 0         otherwise
                                                √
with respect to the Lebesgue measure. Here ̺ = 2 d − 1 is the spectral
radius of the tree.

Spectral measure of invariant processes. The spectral measure of in-
variant random processes will be the spectral measures of the graph-
ings (as bounded self-adjoint operators) associated to them (see also
Backhausz et al. (2015)). This concept is as follows.
   Let X be an invariant random process with marginals having ﬁnite
variance. We modify the deﬁnition of Ω = RV (G) a bit. Namely, we
identify two elements if one can be obtained from the other by apply-
ing a root-preserving automorphism of G. We get Ω̃ this way. The
distribution of X is a probability measure Q on Ω̃.
   We construct a bounded degree graph from Ω̃ by connecting two
elements if and only if one can be obtained from the other one by
moving the root to one of its neighbors. Let E be the edge set of this
graph.
Remark 16. The probability space (Ω̃, Q) with edge set E will form
a graphing. See Hatami, Lovász and Szegedy (2014 , Section 3) or
Backhausz, Szegedy and Virág (2015, Section 2) for the deﬁnition and
details.

     We deﬁne the following operator G acting on L2 (Ω̃, Q):
                        X
           (Gf )(ω) =        f (ω ′)  (f ∈ L2 (Ω̃, Q), ω ∈ Ω̃).
                       (ω,ω ′ )∈E

Notice that G is a bounded self-adjoint operator. Let us denote by
eo ∈ L2 (Ω̃, Q) the function that assigns to each element of Ω̃ its value
at the root.
   According to the spectral theorem, the operator G has a (ﬁnite) spec-
tral measure µX at eo . That is, µX is a ﬁnite measure on R satisfying
the following:
                                 Z
                    k
                  hG eo , eo iQ = tk dµX (t)    (k ≥ 0),

where h·, ·iQ is the scalar product in L2 (Ω̃, Q). Since the degrees in
G are bounded by d, the same holds for the graph constructed above.
This implies that the largest eigenvalue (in absolute value) is equal to
d, and the support of µX is contained in the interval [−d, d].
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                   11

Definition 17 (Spectral measure of a process). The spectral measure
of an invariant random process X (with marginals having finite second
moments) is the spectral measure of G at eo ∈ L2 (Ω̃, Q), which is a
finite measure on [−d, d]. It will be denoted by µX .
  In the sequel, we will use the notation
                          hX, Y i = E(Xo · Yo )
for any invariant pair of random processes (X, Y ) on G which have
marginals with ﬁnite second moments.
   Notice that X is a random element of Ω̃ with distribution Q, the
function eo selects the value at the root, and the action of G corresponds
to the linear factor process given by A (recall Deﬁnition 15). We obtain
              hG k eo , eo iQ = E([Ak X]o · Xo ) = hAk X, Xi.
  We conclude that for every invariant process X its spectral measure
µX satisﬁes
                          Z
(4)            k
             hA X, Xi = tk dµX (t)        (k ≥ 0), and

(5)   A is self-adjoint: hAk X, Al Xi = hAk+l X, Xi          (k, l ≥ 0).
Covariance structure. We will deﬁne the covariance structure of a pro-
cess, and we will see how it is related to the spectral measure if the
marginals of the process have mean 0.
Definition 18 (Covariance structure). Let X be an invariant random
process with marginals having finite second moments. Its covariance
structure, cX : V (G) → R is defined by
                 cX (v) = cov(Xo , Xv )       (v ∈ V (G)).
  Suppose that E(Xo ) = 0. The scalar product hAk X, Xi is the same
as the following: take X, start a random walk of length k from the
root, calculate the covariance of the values of X at the root and at the
endpoint of the random walk, and multiply this by dk . On the other
hand, by linearity of expectation, we obtain
                 hAk X, Xi = hAk δo , cX iG       (k ≥ 0).
Notice that this is a ﬁnite sum. By equation (4) we get
                               Z
(6)                k
                hA δo , cX iG = tk dµX (t)    (k ≥ 0),

which shows the connection between the covariance structure and the
spectral measure of the process.
  Notice that if X is a process that assigns independent random vari-
ables to the vertices of G, then cX = δo and µX = ν; that is, the
spectral measure of the process is the spectral measure of the graph.
12               ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

2.4. Limits of random processes. The d¯2 -distance of invariant pro-
cesses (Deﬁnition 1) induces the notion of d¯2 -limits of factor of i.i.d.
processes.
   We will also deal with distributional convergence. That is, a se-
quence of invariant random processes converges if the sequence of their
distributions on Ω = RV (G) converges weakly to some probability mea-
sure on Ω. A weak limit of factor of i.i.d. process is an invariant process
that can be approximated with factor of i.i.d. processes in distribution.
Notice that d¯2 -convergence implies convergence in distribution.

                    3. Proof of Proposition 9
  Before proving Proposition 9, we need a lemma. Recall that p(A)X
denotes the linear factor process of X whose coeﬃcients are given by
the ﬁnitely supported function p(A)δo (Deﬁnition 15).
Lemma 19 (Isometry). Let X be a random invariant process and p
a polynomial. Assume that E(Xo ) = 0 and the marginals of X have
finite second moments. Then we have
                                    Z
                                
                      E [p(A)X]o = p2 dµX .
                               2



Proof. Using the deﬁnition of the spectral measure µX (equation (4))
and the fact that A is self-adjoint by equation (5), we get
     Z
                                                            
        p2 dµX = hp2 (A)X, Xi = hp(A)X, p(A)Xi = E [p(A)X]2o . 

  Notice that by the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means, the
Bhattacharyya coeﬃcient can be expressed as
                                    Z         Z
                                                1
                  2γ =     inf         hdµ +      dν;
                           h>0                  h
                           h,1/h integrable

or, equivalently, using polynomials:
                                              Z            Z       
                                                   2            2
(7)         2γ = lim            inf                p dµ +       q dν .
                  ε↓0      p,q polynomials
                        |pq−1|<ε on supp(κ)

Proof of Proposition 9. Take any invariant coupling of X, Y . Let
κ = µX + µY , and dµX = f dκ, dµY = gdκ. By Lemma 19 and
equation (1), we need to show |E(Xo Yo)| ≤ γ. For polynomials p, q as
in equation (7), we have
                                
      E (p(A)X)2o + E (q(A)Y )2o ≥ 2 E(p(A)Xo · q(A)Yo )
                   = 2 E(q(A)p(A)Xo · Yo ) = 2 E(Xo Yo) + r,
             p
where |r| ≤ ε E(Xo2 )E(Yo2 ) holds for the error. We conclude by letting
ε → 0.
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                13

  The second inequality is standard, see e.g. Lemma 12.2. in Harsha
(2011). We include a proof for completeness. We deﬁne
                    Z                     Z
              ∆1 = |f − g|dκ;        s = (f + g)dκ.

By the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, we have
    Z p            Z p                  Z          2
             √ 2             √ 2
       ( f − g) dκ ( f + g) dκ ≥           |f − g|dκ = ∆21 .

On the other hand, the deﬁnition of s implies that
  Z p                   Z           p               Z p
             √ 2                                              √
     ( f + g) dκ = f + g + 2 f gdκ = 2s − ( f − g)2 dκ.
                 R √      √
Hence for q = ( f − g)2 dκ we obtain q(2s − q) ≥ ∆21 . It follows
              p
that q ≥ s − s2 − ∆21 .
  The last inequality is straightforward.
                                                    R√
  As for (b), singularity of µX and µY implies that    f gdη = 0. Hence
the statement follows from the above inequality |E(Xo Yo )| ≤ γ.     

                      4. Proof of Theorem 2
Lemma 20 (Spectral measures of spherical linear functions). There
exists an isometry between L and L2 (R, ν) such that the following hold.
(a) For all α ∈ L and its image α̂ we have
                                 Z
                       hα, αiG = α̂2 (t)dν(t).

(b) Let α ∈ L. Then the spectral measure of the spherical linear factor
    of i.i.d. process given by α has density α̂2 with respect to ν.
(c) Let h ∈ L2 (R, ν) be a measurable function. Then there exists a
    spherical linear factor of i.i.d. process X such that µX is the mea-
    sure with density function h2 with respect to ν.
Proof. (a) Let p be a polynomial. By equation (3) we have
                                       Z
                  hp(A)δo , p(A)δo iG = p2 (t)dν(t).

It follows that p(A)δo 7→ p is an isometry from the appropriate subspace
of ℓ2 (G) to the set of polynomials in L2 (R, ν). As usual, this isometry
has a unique extension to the ℓ2 -closure; that is, there is an isometry
between L and L2 (R, ν) (as polynomials form a dense set in the latter
space).
   (b) Let (pn ) be a sequence of polynomials tending to α̂ in L2 (R, ν).
Let Y be an i.i.d. process, and X is the spherical linear factor of i.i.d.
process obtained by α from Y . The Cauchy–Schwarz inequality implies
           lim hAk pn (A)Y, pn (A)Y i = hAk X, Xi     (k ≥ 0).
          n→∞
14               ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

By equations (3) and (6) this yields
    Z
lim   tk p2n (t)dν(t) = lim hAk pn (A)δo , pn (A)δo iG = hAk X, Xi (k ≥ 0).
n→∞                    n→∞


  On the other hand, since (pn ) tends to α̂ in L2 (R, ν), we conclude
that                      Z
                hAk X, Xi =      tk α̂2 (t)dν(t)   (k ≥ 0).

This implies that dµX = α̂2 dν, and the proof of part (b) is complete.
   (c) Based on the isometry between L and L2 (R, ν), let α ∈ L be
chosen such that α̂ = h. Let X be the spherical linear function given by
α. The argument in the proof of (b) implies that the spectral measure
of X has density h2 with respect to ν.                                
Lemma 21. Let X be an invariant random process such that E(Xo ) =
0, X has marginals with finite second moments, and cX ∈ ℓ2 (G). Then
µX is absolutely continuous with respect to the spectral measure ν of
the graph.

Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that cX = p(A)δo for some polynomial p. Then,
by self-adjointness and equation (3), we have
                                         Z
         k              k
      hA δo , cX iG = hA δo , p(A)δo iG = tk p(t)dν(t) (k ≥ 0).

By equation (6) we obtain that the measure with density function p
will be the spectral measure of X. Hence µX is absolutely continuous
with respect to ν.
  Next, we assume that cX ∈ L. Let (pn ) be a sequence of polynomials
converging to cX in ℓ2 (G). Taking limits in the previous equation and
applying Cauchy–Schwarz inequality we obtain that
                                                    Z
          k                 k
       hA δo , cX i = lim hA δo , pn (A)δo iG = lim   tk pn (t)dν(t)
                      n→∞                       n→∞
                      Z
                    = tk ccX dν(t),

                2
where ccX ∈ L ([−d, d], ν) is the image of cX at the isomorphism deﬁned
in Lemma 20. Again, this implies that µX is absolutely continuous with
respect to ν with density cc X.
                      2
   Finally, let cX ∈ ℓ (G) be arbitrary. By deﬁnition, L is a closed linear
subspace in the Hilbert space ℓ2 (G). Let cX ∈ L be the projection of
cX into this subspace. Since the projection does not change the scalar
product with vectors from the subspace, we have
                hAk δo , cX iG = hAk δo , cX iG    (k ≥ 0).
          SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                             15

Therefore the spectral measure of X is the same as the spectral measure
corresponding to cX , which is absolutely continuous with respect to
ν.                                                                   
Proof of Theorem 2. We start with showing that (i) implies (ii). Let
µ be a ﬁnite measure, which is absolutely continuous with respect to
                                                      √
the spectral measure ν; its density is g ≥ 0. Since g ∈ L2 ([−d, d], ν),
by part (c) of Lemma 20 there exists a spherical linear factor of i.i.d.
process with spectral measure having density g with respect to ν.
    (ii) ⇒ (iii), (iii) ⇒ (iv) are trivial.
    (iv) ⇒ (v) We say that a factor of i.i.d. process is a block factor of
i.i.d. if the factor map depends only on the values in a ball of ﬁnite
radius.
    A factor of i.i.d. process can be approximated with block factor of
i.i.d. processes in the d¯2 -distance. See Lyons (2014) for trees, but
the proof is similar for vertex-transitive graphs. (To see this, let
f ∈ L2 (Ω, P ) be the rule of a factor of i.i.d. process, and let Fr =
σ{ωv : |v| ≤ r} ⊂ Ω. By the martingale convergence theorem, the
sequence of block factor of i.i.d. processes with rule E(f |Fr ) converges
to the factor of i.i.d. process with rule f in the d¯2 -metric.) Thus, d¯2 -
limits of factor of i.i.d. processes can also be approximated with block
factors. The covariance structure of a block factor of i.i.d. process is
ﬁnitely supported, hence it is in ℓ2 (G). Thus every block factor of i.i.d.
process has absolutely continuous spectral measure by Lemma 21. This
shows that (iv) implies (v).
    Finally, we prove that (v) implies (i). Let (X (n) )n≥1 be a sequence
of invariant random processes such that each µ(n) = µX (n) is absolutely
continuous with respect to the spectral measure ν with density function
g (n) . Furthermore, assume that X (n) → X in the d¯2 -distance as n → ∞.
    It follows from the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and the deﬁnition of
 ¯                             (n)
d2 -convergence that Var(Xo ) → Var(Xo ) holds as n → ∞. Therefore
Proposition 9 implies that
(8)                         d(µ(n) , µX )T V → 0              (n → ∞).
We have                                       Z
                (n)        (m)
                                         1
          d µ         ,µ             TV
                                        =         g (n) − g (m) dν      (n, m ≥ 1).
                                          2
                               
Equation (8) implies that g (n) is a Cauchy sequence in L1 ([−d, d], ν).
Due to the completeness of this space, we get that there exists g ∈
L1 ([−d, d], ν) such that
                  g (n) → g              in L1 ([−d, d], ν)          (n → ∞).
The dominated convergence theorem implies that
                                                  TV
                            µ(n) = g (n) dν → gdν              (n → ∞)
16              ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

with respect to the total variation distance (by this notation, we mean
the measures having the given density with respect to ν). Hence dµX =
gdν, and we conclude that µX is absolutely continuous with respect to
the spectral measure of the graph G.                                  

                     5. Proof of Theorem 4
Lemma 22. Let (X (n) ) be a sequence of invariant random processes
(with marginals having finite second moments) with covariance struc-
tures (cn ) and spectral measures (µn ).
(a) Suppose that X is another invariant random process such that
             cn (v) → cX (v) for all v ∈ V (G) as n → ∞.
    Then µn → µX weakly as n → ∞. In particular, µn tends to
    µ weakly if X (n) tends to X in distribution and each X (n) is a
    Gaussian process.
(b) Suppose that µn converges weakly to a finite measure µ. Then there
    exists an invariant random process X with spectral measure µ =
    µX .
Proof. (a) Since every p(A)δo has ﬁnite support, by equation (3) we
obtain that
     Z                                                 Z
        p(t)dµn (t) = hp(A)δo , cn iG → hp(A)δo , ciG = p(t)dµ(t)

holds as n → ∞ for all polynomials p. The set of polynomials is dense
in the set of continuous functions with respect to the supremum norm,
hence µn tends to µ weakly.
   Furthermore, in case of Gaussian processes, convergence in distribu-
tion implies the pointwise convergence of the covariance structures.
   (b) We neglect the degenerate case µ([−d, d]) = 0. Lemma 19 and
                                      (n) 2 
the ﬁniteness of µ implies that E Xo            is bounded. Hence the
covariance structures are uniformly bounded by the Cauchy–Schwarz
inequality. Since the vertex set of G is countable, we may choose a
subsequence X (nm ) such that
(9)           cnm (v) → c(v) for all v ∈ V (G) as m → ∞
for some c : V (G) → R. Pointwise convergence preserves the property
of being a covariance structure of an invariant process, hence there
exists an invariant Gaussian process X with covariance structure c.
On the other hand, equation (9) and part (a) imply that µnm → µX
weakly as m → ∞. We conclude that µ = µX .                        
Proof of Theorem 4. (ii) ⇒ (iii) is trivial.
  (iii) ⇒ (i) Suppose that the invariant process X is the limit of the
factor of i.i.d. processes (X (n) ) in distribution, and X has marginals
          SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                      17

with ﬁnite second moments. Denote by X (n,T ) the truncation of X (n)
at level T :
                                (n)
                   
                   T,      if Xv > T ;
         Xv(n,T ) = Xv(n) , if Xv(n) ∈ [−T, T ]; (v ∈ V (Td )).
                   
                                (n)
                    −T,     if Xv < −T ;
Let X T be the truncated version of X.
   Since the truncation is a continuous function, X (n,T ) → X T in dis-
tribution as n → ∞. By boundedness, we have
(10)        cov(Xv(n,T ) , Xw(n,T ) ) → cov(XvT , XwT )     (n → ∞)
for all v, w ∈ V (Td ) and T > 0.
   The second moment condition on X implies
(11)           cov(XvT , XwT ) → cov(Xv , Xw )            (T → ∞)
for all v, w ∈ V (G).
   Since X (n) is a factor of i.i.d. process, X (n,T ) is also factor of i.i.d. By
(10), (11) and a diagonalization argument we obtain that the covariance
structure of X is the pointwise limit of covariance structures of factor
                                             (n)    (n)
of i.i.d. processes. (Note that cov(Xv , Xw ) may not converge to
cov(Xv , Xw ).)
   To summarize, we can ﬁnd a sequence of factor of i.i.d. covariance
structures (cm ) such that cm (v) → cX (v) for all v ∈ V (G) as m → ∞.
Part (a) of Lemma 22 implies that µm tends to µ weakly. By Theorem
2 every µm is absolutely continuous with respect to ν. Therefore the
support of µ is contained in supp(ν).
   (i) ⇒ (ii) Let µ be a ﬁnite measure such that supp(µ) ⊆ supp(ν).
There exist a sequence of ﬁnite measures (µn ) such that it converges
weakly to µ and every µn is absolutely continuous with respect to ν.
   On the other hand, Theorem 2 implies that for every µn there exists
a spherical linear factor of i.i.d process X (n) whose spectral measure
is µn . It follows from part (b) of Lemma 22 that µ is the spectral
measure of some Gaussian process X. In addition, the proof of the
lemma shows that the covariance structures of a subsequence of X (n)
converge pointwise to the covariance structure of X. Since every X (n)
is spherical, it is also Gaussian. In case of Gaussian processes the
pointwise convergence of covariance structures implies           convergence in
distribution. Therefore some subsequence of X (n) converges to X in
distribution, which concludes the proof.                                         
Remark 23. Notice that linear factor of i.i.d. processes are always
Gaussian. Therefore for an absolutely continuous measure we can ﬁnd
a Gaussian factor of i.i.d. process with this spectral measure. Similarly,
for measures supported on supp(ν), the appropriate process is the weak
limit of Gaussian factor of i.i.d. processes as well.
18               ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

                            6. Applications
6.1. Process spectrum.

Proof of Theorem 7. First we prove the statement for atomic measures.
Suppose that x ∈ psp(G), and µ is an atom at x. Given ε > 0, there
exists a process X ε such that µX ε ([x − ε, x + ε]) > 0. It follows that
there exists a polynomial pε such that the following hold for the measure
dµ∗ε = pε dµX ε (i.e. the measure µ∗ε that has density function pε with
respect to µX ε ):
µ∗ε (R \ [x − ε, x + ε]) < ε;   µ(x) − ε ≤ µ∗ε ([x − ε, x + ε]) ≤ µ(x) + ε.
Notice that µ∗ε tends to µ weakly as ε → 0. Equation (4) implies that
the process pε (X ε ), which is a ﬁnite linear factor of X ε by Deﬁnition
15, has spectral measure µ∗ε . Putting this together with Lemma 22 (b),
we conclude that µ is the spectral measure of some invariant random
process.
  Further on, if the support of µ consists of ﬁnitely many atoms, then
one can take the sum of independent copies of invariant random pro-
cesses constructed for atomic measures, multiplied by appropriate con-
stants. The covariance structure is additive due to independence, which
shows by equation (6) that the spectral measure is µ.
  Finally, if we have an arbitrary ﬁnite measure µ whose support is
contained in psp(G), then it can be approximated weakly with measures
µn , where each µn is supported on ﬁnitely many atoms. For every µn
we already have a process X (n) with spectral measure µn . We ﬁnish
the proof by applying part (b) of Lemma 22.                             


Proof of Proposition 8. (ii) ⇒ (i) We will use the next formulation of
Kazhdan’s property: every sequence of positive deﬁnite functions on G
that converges to 1 pointwise (i.e. on compact subsets) converges to 1
uniformly on G.
   Let X be the following process: constant 1 on all vertices with prob-
ability 1/2, and constant −1 with probability 1/2. Then cX (v) = 1 for
all v ∈ V (G), and, by equation (6) it follows that µX = δd is an atomic
measure at d.
   Let cn : V (G) → R be a sequence of positive deﬁnite functions
converging pointwise to 1. We can ﬁnd a sequence of invariant processes
(X (n) ) such that X (n) has covariance structure cn . By Lemma 22 (a)
we obtain that µX (n) → µX weakly. It follows from (ii) and the fact
µX = δd that
                         µX (n) = (1 − εn )δd + µ′n ,
where εn → 0, and (µ′n ) is a sequence of measures such that µ′n ([−d, d])
tends to 0 as n → ∞, and µ′n is supported on psp(G).
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                 19

  Since µX (n) is the spectral measure corresponding to X (n) , we get
that µ′n is the spectral measure corresponding to cn − (1 − ε). That is,
we have
                                    Z
              k
           hA (cn − (1 − ε)), δo i = tk dµ′n   (k = 0, 1, . . .).

It follows that (cn −(1−ε)) is positive deﬁnite for each n, and hence it is
a covariance structure of an invariant process. The fact µ′n ([−d, d]) → 0
implies that (cn − (1 − ε))(0) tends to 0. By the Cauchy–Schwarz
inequality we obtain that cn − (1 − ε) converges to 0 uniformly. Hence
cn converges to constant 1 uniformly, and G has Kazhdan’s property
(T ).
   (i) ⇒ (ii) Let X be the constant 1 process. Its spectral measure
is an atomic measure at d, hence d is always in the process spectrum.
Suppose (for contradiction) that d is not an isolated point. Choose a
sequence of numbers (an ) with limit d such that an ∈ psp(G) for all n.
Theorem 7 implies that we can ﬁnd a sequence of invariant processes
X (n) such that the spectral measure of X (n) is an atomic measure at an
for each n. It follows that µX (n) → µX weakly as n → ∞. Similarly to
the proof of Lemma 22, we can assume that the covariance structures
of X (n) converge pointwise to cX , by choosing an appropriate subse-
quence. By the characterization of Kazhdan’s property using positive
semideﬁnite functions (covariance structures are positive semideﬁnite),
we get that cX (n) → cX ≡ 1 uniformly on V (G).
   On the other hand, if H is inﬁnite and has Kazhdan’s property (T ),
then it can not be amenable (see e.g. Bekka, de la Harpe and Valette
2008). Therefore its spectral radius is strictly less than d. Therefore
the covariance of Xo and Xv , where v is the endpoint of a random walk
of length k, decays exponentially as a function of k. This contradicts
the uniform convergence of correlation structures above. Hence the
process spectral radius is less than d.                                  

6.2. Gaussian wave functions.

Proof of Corollary 11. We check that µX is the Dirac measure which
puts an atom of weight 1 at λ:
                                                 Z
          k          k          k            k
       hA X, Xi = λ hX, Xi = λ Var(Xo ) = λ = tk dµX (t).

   Diﬀerent Dirac measures are singular measures. On the other hand,
the measure µY is absolutely continuous with respect to the spectral
measure of the graph by Theorem 2. Hence it is absolutely continu-
ous with respect to the Lebesgue measure in case (b), and again, it is
singular to the Dirac measure. Therefore both parts of the statement
follow from Proposition 9 (b).                                      
20                  ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

6.3. Linear factor of i.i.d. processes and d¯2 -convergence. First
we prove the following statement about spherical linear processes.
Proposition 24. Suppose that X (n) is a sequence of spherical linear
factor of i.i.d. processes such that X (n) → X with respect to the d¯2 -
distance as n → ∞. Then (the distribution of ) X is a spherical linear
factor of i.i.d. process.

Proof. Let αn ∈ L be the function which deﬁnes X (n) . Lemma 20
                 cn 2 dν. On the other hand, due to the d¯2 -convergence
implies µX (n) = α
of X (n) and part (a) of Proposition 9, we get that µX (n) is a Cauchy
sequence in total variation distance. Therefore, since L1 ([−d, d], ν) is
complete,
          we can ﬁnd a function which is the limit of the sequence
 cn 2 . It has to be nonnegative, hence there exists α̂ ∈ L2 ([−d, d], ν)
 α
such that α̂ ≥ 0 and
                   Z
                       cn 2 − α̂2 dν → 0
                       α                   (n → ∞).

     Using the inequality (a − b)2 ≤ |a2 − b2 | for a, b > 0, this yields
                    Z
                        αn − α̂)2 dν → 0
                       (c                      (n → ∞).

   Let α ∈ L be the function corresponding to α according to part (a)
of Lemma 20. Let X α be the spherical linear factor of i.i.d. process
given by α. By applying αn and α on the same i.i.d. process (which
deﬁnes the coupling), and using Lemma 20 (b), we have
                 Z
                                                    
                     αn − α̂)2 dν = E (Xo(n) − Xoα )2 .
                    (c

   Hence X (n) converges to X α in the d¯2 -distance. Convergence in d¯2 -
distance implies convergence in distribution, and the limit is unique.
We conclude that the distribution of X is equal to the distribution of
X α , which is a spherical linear factor of i.i.d. process.            

Proof of Corollary 10. Invariant Gaussian processes are determined by
their covariance structure. Hence every Gaussian factor of i.i.d. process
is a linear factor of i.i.d. process by Theorem 2.
   On the other hand, every linear factor of i.i.d. process is spherical on
the d-regular tree, because every ﬁnitely supported radial function is a
polynomial of A. Proposition 24 implies that the limit of the sequence
is a linear factor of i.i.d. process. Hence it is Gaussian.               

6.4. Gaussian free field. We recall the deﬁnition of an analogue of
the Gaussian free ﬁeld on transient graphs, and we will show that all
these random processes are factor of i.i.d. processes (see also Exercise
10.31. in Lyons and Peres (2014)).
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                21

Definition 25 (Gaussian free ﬁeld). Let G be a transient and vertex-
transitive graph. An invariant Gaussian random process is a Gaussian
free field if its covariance structure is the Green function:
                                 X∞  k
                                       A
                                            .
                                 k=0
                                       d

   Notice that our assumption that G is transient implies that this series
is convergent, because the number of visits of a random walk starting
from the root is ﬁnite almost surely.
Proposition 26. A Gaussian free field is a linear factor of i.i.d. pro-
cess.

Proof. Consider the function deﬁned by
                X∞  k
                      x        d
                           =           (x ∈ (−d, d)).
                k=0
                      d      d−x

The transitivity of G implies that this function is in L1 ([−d, d], ν),
where ν is the spectral measure of G. It follows from the deﬁnition
of the Gaussian free ﬁeld that this is the density function of its spec-
tral measure. Theorem 2 and the fact that Gaussian processes are
determined by their covariance structures imply the statement.        

6.5. Gaussian Markov processes on the tree. We will need the fol-
lowing family of polynomials, which plays an important role in under-
standing the radial functions on the regular tree. Let (rn ) be the unique
sequence of polynomials satisfying the following recurrence equations:
             r0 (x) = 1;
(12)        xr0 (x) = r1 (x);
            xrn (x) = (d − 1)rn−1 (x) + rn+1 (x)     (n ≥ 1).
The polynomial rn has degree n. These are sometimes called Dunau
polynomials, and they are closely related to Chebyshev polynomials of
the second kind (see e.g. Alon, Benjamini, Lubetzky and Sodin 2007,
Backhausz, Szegedy and Virág 2014, Arnaud and Letac 1984, Figà-
Talamanca and Nebbia 1991). On the other hand, they are orthogonal
with respect to the Plancherel measure. Moreover, the following can
be proved by induction: r0 (A)δo = δo , and for n ≥ 1 we have
                                    (
                                     1, if |v| = n;
(13)               [rn (A)δ0 ](v) =
                                     0, otherwise.
This implies that all radial functions on the tree are given by limits of
polynomials of A.
22                  ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

Proof of Proposition 12. Let c̺ : V (Td ) → R be deﬁned by c̺ (v) = ̺|v| .
By equation (2), this is the covariance structure of the Gaussian Markov
process. First we decide whether c̺ is in ℓ2 (Td ):
                    ∞
                    X                                                 1
               1+         d(d − 1)k−1̺2k < ∞ ⇔ |̺| < √                   .
                    k=1
                                                                     d−1
                          1
Hence in the case |̺| < √d−1  Lemma 21 applies. However, we compute
                                  1
this density function for |̺| < √d−1  , in order to deal with the case
       1
|̺| = √d−1 . Equations (2) and (13) imply that
                               X
                          c̺ =    ̺k rk (A)δo .
                                      k=0

  Based on the proof of Lemma 21, we obtain that the density function
(with respect to the spectral measure of the tree) of the spectral mea-
sure of the Gaussian Markov process with parameter ̺ is the following:
                                         ∞
                                         X
                              f̺ (x) =          ̺k rk (x).
                                         k=0

To compute this sum, let
                                            ∞
                                            X
                             g(x, y) =            rk (x)y k .
                                            k=1

Then by recurrence equation (12) we have
                           ∞
                           X                      ∞
                                                  X
                                            k
      xg(x, y) = (d − 1)       rk−1 (x)y +             rk+1 (x)y k
                           k=1                     k=1
                            X∞                      X∞
                                                  1
              = y(d − 1)          rk (x)y k +           rk (x)y k
                            k=0
                                                  y k=2
                                                  1
              = y(d − 1)rk (0) + y(d − 1)g(x, y) + [g(x, y) − r1 (x)y]
                                                  y
                                              1
              = y(d − 1) + y(d − 1)g(x, y) + g(x, y) − x.
                                              y
     This yields
                                        xy − y 2(d − 1)
                          g(x, y) =                        .
                                      1 + y 2 (d − 1) − xy
     Hence the density function of µ is the following:
                                       1                       1 
      f̺ (x) = g(x, ̺) + 1 =                           |̺| < √     .
                             1 + ̺2 (d − 1) − x̺               d−1
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES                  23

             1
  For ̺ = √d−1  the covariance structure is not in ℓ2 (Td ). However, the
calculation above works and we get
                          ∞
                          X                              1
                f (x) =         rk (x)(d − 1)−k/2 =        x     .
                          k=0
                                                      2 − √d−1

This has a singularity
             √          only at the endpoint of the Plancherel interval,
namely, at 2 d −√1. Since the density function of the Plancherel mea-
sure behaves like x at the endpoints of its support, this function is still
integrable with respect to the Plancherel measure: f ∈ L1 ([−d, d], ν).
Therefore this is the density function of the spectral measure of the
Gauss Markov process with respect to ν. Hence √      c̺ is the covariance
                             √ process if |̺| ≤ 1/ d − 1. Similar ar-
structure of a factor of i.i.d.
gument works for ̺ = −1/ d − 1.) For Gauss Markov processes this
implies that the process is linear factor of i.i.d. itself, according to
Theorem 2.
   As for the other direction, we refer to Backhausz, Szegedy and Virág
(2015): from that result it follows immediately that covariance struc-
ture with larger absolute value of ̺ can not be factor of i.i.d.        

6.6. Branching Markov chains. We can also examine the covariance
structures of branching Markov chains on the d-regular tree. Fix a
reversible Markov chain with ﬁnite state space S and transition matrix
M. Choose the state of the root o uniformly at random. Then the
Markov chain spreads out: the neighbors of the root get their states
given the state of the root and according to the transition probabilities
given by M. The transitions are conditionally independent given the
state of the root. This is continued to get the states of the neighbors of
the neighbors of the root, and so on. This will be an invariant random
process on Td . One can get the Potts and the Ising model as particular
cases (see e.g. Evans, Kenyon, Peres and Schulman 2000, Sly 2011).
   Let ϕ be eigenvector of M corresponding to the largest eigenvalue.
Then the correlation of ϕ(Xo ) and ϕ(Xv ) is ̺|v| , where ̺ is the spectral
radius of the transition matrix M. Therefore the calculation above
implies that this covariance structure
                                  √         is a factor of i.i.d. covariance
structure if and only if |̺| ≤ 1/ d − 1. However, this does not imply
that the process itself is factor of i.i.d. in this case.
   A particular case is the Ising model, where S = {−1, 1} and
                                  1+̺ 1−̺ 
                           M=         2      2    .
                                    1−̺    1+̺
                                        2    2
                                                                    1
It is known that the process is itself a factor of i.i.d. if |̺| ≤ d−1 , see
e.g. Lyons (2014). It is open whether√the Ising model itself is factor of
i.i.d. in the case 1/(d − 1) < |̺| ≤ 1/ d − 1.
24                 ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

6.7. Open questions. We ﬁnish the paper with some open questions.
     (1) Is there a spectral description of the structure determined by
         the expectation of the product of the random variables at more
         than two vertices? In this case not just the distance matters,
         the conﬁguration of the vertices has to be ﬁxed.
     (2) Is there a spectral description of the moments of the random
         variables at the vertices? That is, we assign Xv , Xv2 , . . . , Xvk to
         each vertex instead of Xv , and we can take covariance matrices
         of the vectors assign to a pair of vertices.

Acknowledgement. The authors are especially grateful to Russell
Lyons for useful comments that led to a shorter proof of Proposition
9. The authors thank Péter Csikvári, Viktor Harangi and Mustazee
Rahman for reading previous versions of the manuscript and provid-
ing valuable suggestions, Gérard Letac for references, Gábor Pete for
the question on the covariance structure of d¯2 -limits of factor of i.i.d.
processes, and Balázs Szegedy for useful discussions. The ﬁrst author
was partially supported by the National Research, Development and
Innovation Oﬃce (NKFIH, grant no. 109684), and by the MTA Rényi
Institute Lendület Limits of Structures Research Group. The second
author was supported by Marie Sklodowska-Curie actions ”Spectra”,
by the NSERC Discovery Accelerator Supplements Program and by
the MTA Rényi ”Lendület” Groups and Graphs Research Group.


                                References
Arnaud, J.-P. (1980). Fonctions sphériques et fonctions déﬁnies
  positives sur l’arbre homogène, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. A-B
  290(2): A99–A101.
Arnaud, J.-P. (1994). Stationary processes indexed by a homogeneous
  tree, Ann. Probab. 22(1): 195–218.
Backhausz, Á. and Szegedy, B. (2014). On large girth regular
  graphs and random processes on trees, preprint. (arXiv:1406.4420
  [math.PR]).
Backhausz, Á., Szegedy, B. and Virág, B. (2015). Ramanujan graph-
  ings and correlation decay in local algorithms, Random Structures
  Algorithms 47(3): 424–435.
Bekka, B., de la Harpe, P. and Valette, A. (2008). Kazhdan’s property
  (T), Vol. 11 of New Mathematical Monographs, Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge.
Bowen, L. (2010). The ergodic theory of free group actions: entropy
  and the f -invariant, Groups Geom. Dyn. 4(3): 419–432.
Cartier, P. (1973). Harmonic analysis on trees, Harmonic analysis
  on homogeneous spaces (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XXVI,
         SPECTRAL MEASURES OF FACTOR OF I.I.D. PROCESSES              25

  Williams Coll., Williamstown, Mass., 1972), Amer. Math. Soc.,
  Providence, R.I., pp. 419–424.
Csóka, E., Gerencsér, B., Harangi, V. and Virág, B. (2015). Invariant
  Gaussian processes and independent sets on regular graphs of large
  girth, Random Structures Algorithms 47(2): 284–303.
Csóka, E. and Lippner, G. (2012). Invariant random matchings in
  Cayley graphs, preprint. (arXiv:1211.2374 [math.CO]).
Elek, G. and Lippner, G. (2010). Borel oracles. An analytical approach
  to constant-time algorithms, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 138(8): 2939–
  2947.
Evans, W., Kenyon, C., Peres, Y. and Schulman, L. J. (2000). Broad-
  casting on trees and the Ising model, Ann. Appl. Probab. 10(2): 410–
  433.
Figà-Talamanca, A. and Picardello, M. A. (1982). Spherical functions
  and harmonic analysis on free groups, J. Funct. Anal. 47(3): 281–
  304.
Gamarnik, D. and Sudan, M. (2014). Limits of local algorithms over
  sparse random graphs, Proceedings of the 5-th Innovations in The-
  oretical Computer Science conference, ACM Special Interest Group
  on Algorithms and Computation Theory .
Harangi, V. and Virág, B. (2015). Independence ratio and random
  eigenvectors in transitive graphs, Ann. Probab. 43(5): 2810–2840.
Harsha, P. (2011). Communication complexity lecture notes.
  URL:         http://www.tcs.tifr.res.in/     prahladh/teaching/2011-
  12/comm/lectures/l12.pdf
Hatami, H., Lovász, L. and Szegedy, B. (2014). Limits of locally-
  globally convergent graph sequences, Geom. Funct. Anal. 24(1): 269–
  296.
Lasser, R. and Leitner, M. (1990). On the estimation of the mean of
  weakly stationary and polynomial weakly stationary sequences, J.
  Multivariate Anal. 35(1): 31–47.
Lyons, R. (2014). Factors of iid on trees, Combin. Probab. Comput., to
  appear. (arXiv:1401.4197 [math.DS]).
Lyons, R. and Nazarov, F. (2011). Perfect matchings as IID factors on
  non-amenable groups, European J. Combin. 32(7): 1115–1125.
Lyons, R. and Peres, Y. (2014). Probability on trees and networks, in
  preparation.
  URL: http://mypage.iu.edu/˜rdlyons/
Rahman, M. and Virág, B. (2014). Local algorithms for independent
  sets are half-optimal, preprint. (arXiv:1402.0485 [math.PR]).
Sly, A. (2011). Reconstruction for the Potts model, Ann. Probab.
  39(4): 1365–1406.
Woess, W. (2000). Random walks on infinite graphs and groups, Vol.
  138 of Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge.
26                 ÁGNES BACKHAUSZ AND BÁLINT VIRÁG

  Ágnes Backhausz. MTA Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics and Eötvös
Loránd University; Budapest, Hungary.
     E-mail address: backhausz.agnes@renyi.mta.hu

  Bálint Virág. Department of Mathematics, University of Toronto, Canada
and MTA Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics, Budapest, Hungary.
  E-mail address: balint@math.toronto.edu
