                                              Sheaves are the canonical data structure for sensor
                                                                 integration

                                                                              Michael Robinson
                                                                           Mathematics and Statistics
                                                                             American University
arXiv:1603.01446v3 [math.AT] 2 Dec 2016




                                                                            Washington, DC, USA
                                                                            michaelr@american.edu




                                          1. Introduction

                                              There is increasing concern within the data processing community about
                                          “swimming in sensors and drowning in data,” [1] because unifying data across
                                          many disparate sources is difficult. This refrain is repeated throughout many
                                          scientific disciplines, because there are few treatments of unified models for
                                          complex phenomena and it is difficult to infer these models from heterogeneous
                                          data.
                                              A sensor integration framework should be (1) sufficiently general to accu-
                                          rately represent all sensors of interest, and also (2) be able to summarize in-
                                          formation in a faithful way that emphasizes important, actionable information.
                                          Few approaches adequately address these two discordant requirements. Mod-
                                          els of specific phenomena fail when multiple sensor types are combined into a
                                          complex network, because they cannot assemble a global picture consistently.
                                          Bayesian or network theory tolerate more sensor types, but suffer a severe lack
                                          of sophisticated analytic tools.
                                              The mathematics of sheaves partially addresses our two requirements and
                                          provides several powerful inferential tools that are not available to other repre-
                                          sentational frameworks. This article presents (1) a sensor-agnostic measure of
                                          data consistency, (2) a sensor-agnostic optimization method to fuse data, and
                                          (3) sensor-agnostic detection of possible “systemic blind spots.” In this arti-
                                          cle, we show that sheaves provide both theoretical and practical tools to allow
                                          representations of locally valid datasets in which the datatypes and contexts
                                          vary. Sheaves therefore provide a common, canonical language for heteroge-
                                          neous datasets. We show that sheaf-based fusion methods can combine dis-
                                          parate sensor modalities to dramatically improve target localization accuracy
                                          over traditional methods in a series of examples, culminating in Example 24.
                                          Sheaves provide a sensor-agnostic basis for identifying when information may be
                                          inadvertently lost through processing, which we demonstrate computationally
                                          in Examples 30 – 32.



                                          Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                    December 5, 2016
    Other methods typically aggregate data either exclusively globally (on the
level of whole semantic ontologies) or exclusively locally (through various max-
imum likelihood stages). This limits the kind of inferences that can be made by
these approaches. For instance, the data association problem in tracking frus-
trates local approaches (such as those based on optimal state estimation) and
remains essentially unsolved in the general case. The analysis of sheaves avoids
both of these extremes by specifying information where it occurs – locally at
each data source – and then uses global relationships to constrain how these
data are interpreted.
    The foundational and canonical nature of sheaves means that existing ap-
proaches that address aspects of the sensor integration problem space already
illuminate some portion of sheaf theory without exploiting its full potential.
In contrast to the generality that is naturally present in sheaves, existing ap-
proaches to combining heterogeneous quantitative and qualitative data tend to
rely on specific domain knowledge on small collections of data sources. Even in
the most limited setting of pairs quantitative data sources, considerable effort
has been expended in developing models of their joint behavior. Our approach
leverages these pairwise models into models of multiple-source interaction. Ad-
ditionally, where joint models are not yet available, sheaf theory provides a
context for understanding the properties that such a model must have.

1.1. Contribution
    Sometimes data fusion is described methodologically, as it is in the Joint Di-
rectors of Laboratories (JDL) model [2, 3], which defines operationally-relevant
“levels” of data fusion. A more permissive – and more theoretically useful – def-
inition was given by Wald [4], “data fusion is a formal framework in which are
expressed the means and tools for the alliance of data originating from different
sources.” This article shows that this is precisely what is provided by sheaf the-
ory, by carefully outlining the requisite background in sheaves alongside detailed
examples of collections of sensors and their data. In Chapter 3 of Wald’s book
[5], the description of the implications of this definition is strikingly similar to
what is presented in this article. But we go further, showing that we obtain not
just a full-fidelity representation of the data and its internal relationships, but
also a jumping-off point for analysis of both the integrated sensor system and
the data it produces.
    We make the distinction between “sensor integration” in which a collection of
models of sensors are combined into a single unified model (the integrated sensor
system), and “sensor data fusion” in which observations from those sensors are
combined. This article presents the sheaf-based workflow outlined by Figure 1,
which divides the process of working with sensors and their data into several
distinct stages:
  1. Sensor integration unifies models of the individual sensors and their inter-
     relations into a single system model, which we will show has the mathemat-
     ical structure of a sheaf. We emphasize that no sensor data are included
     in the sensor system model represented by the sheaf.


                                         2
                                                                 Sensor
                                           Cohomology            deployment
                                                                 analysis

               Sensor                                                     Uniﬁed
                             Sensor          Sheaf
               deployment                                Data fusion      global
                             integration     model
               (no data)                                                  state
                                                         Sensor data
                                           Compute                Data
                                           consistency            quality
                                           radii                  estimates


                    Figure 1: The sheaf-based multi-sensor workflow.




   2. Consistency radius computation uses the sheaf to quantify the level of
      self-consistency of a set of data supplied by the sensors.
   3. Data fusion takes the sheaf and data from the sensors to obtain a new
      dataset that is consistent across the sensor system through a constrained
      optimization. The consistency radius of the original data places a lower
      bound on the amount of distortion incurred by the fusion process.
   4. Cohomology of the sheaf detects possible problems that could arise within
      the data fusion process. Although cohomology does not make use of any
      sensor data, it quantifies the possible impact that certain aspects of the
      data may have on the fusion process.
   Through a mixture of theory and detailed examples, we will show how this
workflow presents solutions to four distinct problem domains:
   1. Formalizing the description of an integrated sensor system as a well-
      defined mathematical entity (defined by Axioms 1–6 in Section 3),
   2. Quantifying the internal consistency of the data from individual sensors
      (the consistency radius in Definition 20 in Section 4),
   3. Deriving globally consistent data from the data provided by the entire col-
      lection of sensors (solving Problem 19, sheaf-based data fusion in Section
      4), and
   4. Measuring the impact of the relationships between sensors on what data
      will be deemed consistent (using cohomology in Section 5).

1.2. Historical context
    There are essentially two threads of research in the literature on data fusion:
(1) physical sensors that return structured, numerical data (“hard” fusion), and
(2) unstructured, semantic data (“soft” fusion) [6]. Hard fusion is generally
performed on spatially-referenced data (for example, images), while soft fusion
is generally referenced to a common ontology. Especially in hard fusion, the
spatial references are taken to be absolute. Most sensor fusion is performed
on a pixel-by-pixel basis amongst sensors of the same physical modality (for
instance [7, 8, 9]). It generally requires image registration [10] as a precondition,


                                             3
especially if the sensors have different modalities (for instance [11, 12]). When
image extents overlap but are not coincident, mosaics are the resulting fused
product. These are typically based on pixel- or patch-matching methods (for
instance [13]). Because these methods look for areas of close agreement, they
are inherently sensitive to differences in physical modality. It can be difficult to
extend these ideas to heterogeneous collections of sensors.
    Like hard fusion, soft fusion requires registration amongst different data
sources. However, since there is no physically-apparent “coordinate system,”
soft fusion must proceed without one. There are a number of approaches to
align disparate ontologies into a common ontology [14, 15, 16, 17], against which
analysis can proceed. There, most of the analysis derives from a combination of
tools from natural language processing (for instance [18, 19, 20]) and artificial
intelligence (like the methods discussed in [21, 22, 23]). That these approaches
derive from theoretical logic, type theory, and relational algebras is indicative
of deeper mathematical foundations. These three topics have roots in the same
category theoretic machinery that drives the sheaf theory discussed in this ar-
ticle.
    Weaving the two threads of hard and soft fusion is difficult at best, and is
usually approached statistically, as discussed in [24, 25, 26]. Unfortunately, this
“clouds” the issue. If a stochastic data source is combined with another data
source (deterministic or not), stochastic analysis asserts that the result will be
stochastic. This viewpoint is quite effective in multi-target tracking [27, 28] or
in event detection from social media feeds [29], where there are sufficient data
to estimate probability distributions. But if two deterministic data sources are
combined, one numeric and one textual, why should the result be stochastic?
    Regardless of this conundrum, information theoretic or possibilistic approaches
seem to be natural and popular candidates for performing sensor integration,
for instance [30, 31, 32]. They are actually subsumed by category theory [33, 34]
and arise naturally when needed. These models tend to rely on the homogeneity
of sensors in order to obtain strong theoretical results. Sheaf theory extends the
reach of these methods by explaining that the most robust aspects of networks
tend to be topological in nature. For example, one of the strengths of Bayesian
methods is that strong convergence guarantees are available. However, when
applied to data sources arranged in a feedback loop, Bayesian updates can con-
verge to the wrong distribution or not at all! [35] The fact that this is possible is
witnessed by the presence of a topological feature – a loop – in the relationships
between sources.
    Sheaf theory provides canonical computational tools that sit on the general
framework and has been occasionally [36, 37, 38] used in applications. Un-
fortunately, it is often difficult to get the general machine into a systematic
computational tool. Combinatorial advances [39, 40, 41, 42] have enabled the
approach discussed in this article through the use of finite topologies and related
structures.
    Sheaves, and their cohomological summaries, are best thought of as being
part of category theory. There has been a continuing undercurrent that sheaves
aspire to be more than that – they provide the bridge between categories and


                                         4
logic [43]. The pioneering work by Goguen [44] took this connection seriously,
and inspired this paper – our axioms sets are quite similar – though the focus
of this paper is somewhat different. The approach taken in this paper is that
time may be implicit or explicit in the description of a data source; for Goguen,
time is always explicit. More recently category theory has become a valuable
tool for data scientists, for instance [45], and information fusion [46, 47].

2. Motivating examples

    Although the methodology presented in this article is sufficiently general
to handle many configurations of sensors and data types, we will focus on two
simple scenarios for expository purposes. To emphasize that our approach is
applicable for many sensor modalities, the two scenarios involve rather different
signal models.
  1. A notional search and rescue scenario in which multiple types of sensors
     are used to locate a downed airliner.
  2. A computer vision task involving the tabulation of coins on a table.
   We will carry these two scenarios throughout the article. We will start with
the most basic stage of constructing their integrated sensor models in Section
3, we will then analyze typical sensor data in Section 4, and finally offer a
data-independent analysis of the sensor models in Section 5.

2.1. Search and rescue scenario
     The search and rescue scenario involves three distinct kinds of sensors (this
is simplified from the guidelines produced by the Australian government [48] for
the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370) distributed1 according to Figure
2.
  1. The original flight plan, Air Traffic Control (ATC) radars, and the Auto-
     matic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) aircraft beacon system,
     all of which produce time-stamped locations of an aircraft,
  2. Radio Direction Finding (RDF) sensors provided by amateur radio oper-
     ators, which produce accurately time-stamped but highly uncertain bear-
     ings to an emergency beacon deployed by the aircraft near the crash site,
     and
  3. Wide-area satellite images, which are time-stamped georeferenced intensity-
     valued images.
    The data consists of 612 ATC and ADS-B observations. Of these, 505 ob-
servations contained latitude, longitude, altitude and speed, while the other 107
consisted of latitude and longitude only. The update rate varied considerably

  1 The coastline data was obtained from https://serc.carleton.edu/download/files/79176/coast.mat




                                         5
                          RDF sensor 1


                                                               Satellite image
      Latitude

                                                  Planned ight path
                                          ATC radar

                                         ATC maximum range
                               RDF sensor 2


                                           Longitude

        Figure 2: The sensors used in the search and rescue scenario for this article.




over the data, but typical observations were about 10 km apart. The RDF bear-
ings and satellite images each consisted of exactly one observation each. Since
the data were simulated, various amounts of noise and systematic biases were
applied, as detailed in Example 24.
    The goal of the scenario is to locate the airliner’s crash site. Due to the fact
that the most accurate wide-area sensors – the ATC radars and ADS-B beacons
– do not necessarily report an aircraft’s location over the water, this problem is
limited by uncertainty about what happened after the airliner leaves controlled
airspace. The time of the crash is (of course!) not part of the flight plan, and
was not visible to the ATC radars nor to the satellite.
    The time of crash is central to the problem because it connects the time
of crash, the last known position, and last known velocity to an estimate of
where the crash location was. When corroborated by the intersection of the
RDF bearings, the crash location estimate can be used to task the satellite.
Thus, the problem’s solution is to combine the bearings and time-stamps from
the RDF sensors with the other sensors, a task performed by the “field office.”

2.2. Computer vision scenario
    In the usual formulation of multi-camera mosaic formation (for instance [7,
8]), several cameras with similar perspectives are focused on a scene. Assuming
that the perspectives and lighting conditions are similar enough, large mosaics
can be formed. The problem is more complicated if the lighting or perspectives
differ substantially, but it can still be addressed. In either case, the methodology
aims to align pixels or regions of pixels. If some of the images are produced by
sensors with different modalities – say a LIDAR and a RADAR – pixel alignment
is doomed to fail. Then, the problem is fully heterogeneous, and is usually
handled by trying to interpolate into a common coordinate system [11, 12]. If



                                              6
 Original image 1                Original image 2                  Original image 3




                                                                       Background




                                                                                              ( (
                                                                       discontinuity            2 quarters inside white box
                                                                                                0 dimes inside white box
                                                                                                1 nickel inside white box
                                                                                                1 penny inside white box
                                                                                                2 quarters outside image
                                                                                                0 dimes outside image
                                                                                                0 nickels outside image
                                                                                                1 penny outside image



                    Perfect mosaic                  Imperfect mosaic                   Hybrid observations
                    (images 1 and 2)                (images 2 and 3)                   (images 2 and 3)


Figure 3: Several mosaics (bottom row) of three photographs (top row) under different con-
ditions. The mosaic on the left is perfect, in that the subimages on the overlap have identical
pixel values. The mosaic in the middle is imperfect, in that the pixel values of the two subim-
ages differ somewhat on the overlap. The mosaic on the right combines textual and numeric
data derived from an object detector run on image 2 with the original image 3.




there is insufficient sample support or perspectives are too different, then it is
necessary to match object-level summaries rather than pixel regions [9].
   This example studies the task of counting coins on a table. We will introduce
heterogeneity in the imaging modality through different kinds of processing:
   1. All cameras yield images, with identical lighting and perspective: perfect
      mosaics can be formed (as shown in the lower left mosaic in Figure 3),
   2. All cameras yield images, though lighting and perspective can differ: im-
      perfect mosaics can be formed (as shown in the lower middle mosaic in
      Figure 3), and
   3. A mixture of camera images and object-level detections derived from the
      images: a fully heterogeneous data fusion problem (as shown in the lower
      right mosaic in Figure 3).
    These three examples showcase the transition from homogeneous data in
problem (1) to heterogeneous data in problem (3), with homogeneous data being
a clear special case. These examples highlight how fusion of heterogeneous data
is to be performed, and makes the resulting structure-preserving summaries easy
to interpret.


3. Sensor integration

   The first stage of our workflow constructs a unified model of sensors and
their interactions. To emphasize the generality of our approach from the outset
– our methodology is not limited to any particular kind of sensor – we posit


                                                              7
a set of six Axioms to specify what this integrated system must be. A sheaf
is precisely any mathematical object satisfying all six Axioms. We motivate
the Axioms by way of examples from our two scenarios, a process that also
demonstrates how the Axioms apply for other systems as well.

Axiom 1: The entities observed by the sensors lie in a set X.

    The first Axiom is not controversial. “Entities” might be targets, sensor
data, or even textual documents.
    The second Axiom considers properties of the attributes. In order to quantify
differences between attributes, we will use a pseudometric.
Definition 1. If A is a set, function d : A × A → R is called a pseudometric
when it satisfies the following:
   1. d(x, x) = 0 for all x ∈ A,
   2. d(x, y) = d(y, x) ≥ 0 for all x, y ∈ A, and
   3. d(x, z) ≤ d(x, y) + d(y, z) for all x, y, z ∈ A.
We call the pair (A, d) a pseudometric space.
   If additionally, d(x, y) > 0 whenever x 6= y, we call d a metric and (A, d) a
metric space.

Axiom 2: All possible attributes of the entities lie in a collection2 of pseudo-
    metric spaces A = {(A1 , d1 ), (A2 , d2 ), . . . }.

    We lose no generality by requiring each set of attributes to have a pseudo-
metric, because we may choose the discrete metric which asserts that all pairs
of distinct attributes are distance 1 apart.
Example 2. Throughout this article, we will use the following entities in the
search and rescue scenario:
    • Aircraft last known position, represented as its longitude x, its latitude y,
      and its altitude z,
    • Aircraft last known velocity, which is represented as a horizontal velocity
      vector (vx , vy ) (we will assume the rate of climb or descent is not known),
    • Precise time of the crash, represented as the time elapsed since the last
      known position t,
    • Bearing to RDF sensor 1, represented as a compass bearing θ1 from the
      crash location to the sensor,
    • Bearing to RDF sensor 2, represented as a compass bearing θ2 from the
      crash location to the sensor, and

   2 The examples in this article all make use of a finite collection A, but there is no particular

reason why this collection should be finite or even countable.


                                                8
   • The satellite image, represented by s.
Therefore, X = {x, y, z, vx , vy , t, θ1 , θ2 , s} is the set of entities. The attributes
are given by the following sets, each of which comes with a metric:
   • Three dimensional positions: R3 specifying longitude, latitude, and alti-
     tude in kilometers under the great circle distance metric,
   • Two dimensional positions: R2 specifying longitude and latitude in kilo-
     meters under the great circle distance metric,
   • Two dimensional velocities: R2 specifying longitude and latitude velocities
     in kilometers/second under the Euclidean metric,

   • Time: R in units compatible with the positions and velocities,
   • Bearings: S 1 = {(u, v) : u2 + v 2 = 1} = [0, 360) points on the unit circle,
     represented either by their coordinates or as angles in degrees, and
   • Images: C([0, 1] × [0, 1], R), continuous real-valued functions on the unit
     square. (Satellite images are typically lowpass filtered and oversampled,
     continuous functions are a reasonable model. For other imaging modali-
     ties, piecewise continuity may be a better model.)
Some sensors will also return products of these sets so the set of attributes is
all such products A = {R3 , R2 , R, S 1 , C([0, 1] × [0, 1], R), R3 × R2 , R3 × . . . }.

   Thus far, no attributes have yet been ascribed to entities, so there is nothing
to distinguish entities from one another. Yet since different sets of entities are
measured by sensors, it makes sense to study these sets.
Example 3. For the search and rescue scenario, several sets of entities will be
associated to the sensors as indicated in the list below:

   • Flight plan: {x, y, z},
   • ATC radar : {x, y, z, vx , vy },
   • RDF sensor 1 : {θ1 , t},

   • RDF sensor 2 : {θ2 , t}, and
   • Satellite: {θ1 , θ2 , s}.
The reader is cautioned that each of these are unordered sets of entities. Only
when attributes are assigned to each sensor by Axiom 4, will ordering among
the entities be apparent (see Example 9).
    The field office (where the data fusion is performed) has access to all of the
entities. The sets of entities are permitted to overlap, since the same entity
may be observed by multiple sensors. We usually expect that those pairs of
sensors that are providing the same entities will provide similar attributes for


                                           9
these entities. For instance the flight plan and the ATC should provide similar
position information unless there has been a deviation from the plan. Any such
deviation is probably a cause for concern and is something that we want to
detect!
    One way to formalize the kinds of collections of entities is to construct a
topology on X, which specifies which sets of entities have attributes worthy of
comparison. Intuitively a topology expresses that if two entities are unrelated,
they can be described in isolation of each other. If they are closely related, they
will be “hard to disentangle” and will usually be described together. The way
to formalize this is by enriching a set model of the universe to describe entity
relationships (against which attributes of different entities can then be related)
into a topological one. We recall the definition of a topology:
Definition 4. A topology on a set X is a collection T of subsets of X satisfying
the following properties:
   1. X ∈ T .
   2. ∅ ∈ T .
   3. The union of any collection of elements of T is also in T .
   4. The intersection of any finite collection of elements of T is also in T .
Usually, the elements of T are called open sets, and the pair (X, T ) is called a
topological space. In the context of sensors, a U ∈ T is called a sensor domain.
    The first property of a topology states that it is possible to ascribe attributes
to all entities (it may be impractical, though). The second property states that it
is possible to not describe any entities. The third and fourth properties are more
subtle. They state that two entities can be related through their relationships
with other entities. The finiteness constraint in the fourth property avoids
examining an infinite regress through increasingly entity-specific relationships.3

Axiom 3: The collection of all sets of entities whose attributes are related
    forms a topology T on X.

   We should emphasize that the sets listed in Example 3 do not form a topol-
ogy. There are many intersections, for instance {t} = {θ1 , t} ∩ {θ2 , t}, that do
not correspond to a set of entities provided by a sensor. One must construct
the topology by specifying the open sets as those sets of entities provided by
the sensors, and then extending the collection until it is a topology.
Definition 5. If X is a set and U is a collection of subsets of X, the smallest
topology T which contains U is given by
                                      \
                       T =                          T 0,
                                   T 0 is a topology with U ⊆T 0



   3 In some topologies, the intersection of any collection of elements remains in the topology,

but requiring this would destroy our ability to describe certain phenomena.


                                               10
                                                          θ1

                       x          y   z    vx     vy      t        s

                                                          θ2


    Figure 4: Open sets that generate the topology for the search and rescue scenario




and is called the topology generated by U. In this case, we sometimes say that
U is a subbase for T .

Example 6. Figure 4 shows the relationships between the entity sets from
Example 3. Using these sets as the subbase for the topology results in many
other sets in the topology. The following open sets are formed as intersections:
  1. {t},
  2. {θ1 }, and
  3. {θ2 }.
There are many more open sets formed as unions of these sets, for instance
  1. {θ1 , θ2 },
  2. {θ1 , θ2 , s, t},
  3. {x, y, z, θ1 , θ2 },
  4. {x, y, z, θ1 , θ2 , s},
  5. {x, y, z, θ1 , θ2 , t},
  6. {x, y, z, θ1 , θ2 , s, t},
among others. Rather than being dismayed at all the possibilities, observe that
many of these open sets represent redundant collections of information about
entities. But which collections should be retained? For the moment, we will
retain all of them. We will postpone a more complete answer to that question
until Section 5 when we can provide a theoretical guarantee (Theorem 29) that
information is not lost when only a smaller number of entity sets are used.
    Following Example 6, sensor data will be supplied at some of the open sets
in T . These data are then merged on unions of these open sets whenever the
data are consistent along intersections. The precise relationships among open
sets in T are crucial and generally should have physical meaning.




                                           11
                              (a)                              (b)
Figure 5: Open sets in two different topologies for image fusion: (a) part of the usual Euclidean
topology and (b) a coarser topology generated by two camera fields of view.




Remark 7. Axiom 3 is a true limitation,4 which posits that entities are orga-
nized into local neighborhoods. In all situations of which the author is aware,
the appropriate topology T is either the geometric realization of a cell complex
or (equivalently) a finite topology built on a preorder as described in [49]. The
three axioms encompass unlabeled graphs as a special case, for instance. Finite
topologies are particularly compelling from a practical standpoint even though
relatively little has been written about them. The interested reader should
consult [50] for a (somewhat dated) overview of the interesting problems.

Example 8. In the case of image mosaics, the open sets in T should have
something to do with the regions observed by individual cameras. Let the set of
entities X consist of the locations of points in the scene. There are two obvious
possibilities for a topology:
   1. The topology T1 of the scene itself (some of which is shown in Figure 5(a)),
      generally a manifold or a subspace of Euclidean space based on the pixel
      values or
   2. The topology T2 which is generated by a much smaller collection of sets
      U, in which each U ∈ U consists of a set of points observed by a single
      camera (the entirety of this topology is shown in Figure 5(b)).
Although T1 is rather natural – and is what is usually used when forming mo-
saics – it has the disadvantage of being quite large. Figure 5(a) only shows
a small part of one such example! It also requires fusion to be performed at

   4 Instead of a topology, one might consider generalizing further to a Grothendieck site [43],

but this level of generality seems excessive for practical sensor integration.



                                               12
the pixel level, which is generally inappropriate when there are other heteroge-
neous sensors that do not return pixel values. This also can be computationally
intense, explains why pixel-level fusion scales badly. In contrast, T2 is much
smaller (usually finite) and therefore more amenable both to computations and
to fusion of heterogeneous data types.

Axiom 4: Each sensor assigns one of the pseudometric spaces of attributes to
    an open subset of entities in the topological space (X, T ).

   • This assignment is denoted by S : T → A, so that the attribute pseudo-
     metric space assigned to an open set U ∈ T is written S(U ) ∈ A.

   • The space of attributes S(U ) is called the space of observations over the
     sensor domain U .
   • The pseudometric on S(U ) will be written dU .
   • An element of the Cartesian product U ∈T S(U ) is called an assignment5
                                        Q
     of S.

   • We call an element s ∈ S(X) a global section.

    The distinction between a space of attributes and a space of observations
is that the latter is directly associated to a particular sensor. In this article,
“attributes” may not necessarily be associated to any entity, but “observations”
are attributes that are assigned to a definite open set of entities.
    There are some easy recipes for choosing a space of observations S(U ) based
on the kind of sensor corresponding to the open set U :

   • For a camera sensor, the space of observations should be the set of possible
     images, perhaps denoted as vectors in R3mn (m rows, n columns, and 3
     colors for each pixel).
   • For text documents, the space of observations could be the content of a
     document as a list of words or a word frequency vector.

   • If the open set corresponds to the intersection of two sensors of the same
     type, then usually the observations ought to also be of that type. For
     instance, the observations in the overlap between two camera images are
     smaller images.

However, if the open set corresponds to the intersection or union of two different
sensors (and therefore not a physical sensor), the set of observations needs to
be more carefully chosen and may not correspond to the raw data supplied by
any sensor. This situation is made well-defined by Axioms 5 – 6.

   5 When all of the sets of observations are vector spaces, assignments are usually called

serrations.



                                            13
Example 9. Satisfying Axioms 1-4 in the search and rescue scenario requires
pairing the open sets in Example 6 with the attribute sets from Example 2. As
noted in Example 6, there are many open sets; for brevity’s sake, we will not
specify them all. We will denote the assignment of observations S.
    Axiom 4 merely asks that S assign spaces of observations, so for instance the
x, y, and z coordinates could be assigned by S({x, y, z}) = R3 . Since the open
set U1 = {x, y, z} implies no ordering on the entities, it is not yet clear which
component of R3 corresponds to which entity. Indeed it may be that the corre-
spondence between attributes and entities might be rather complicated. Given
that consideration, those open sets that are associated to sensors according to
Example 3 will be modeled as having spaces of observations as follows:
    • Flight plan: S(U1 ) = S({x, y, z}) = R3 the last known position according
      to the flight plan.
    • ATC : S(U2 ) = S({x, y, z, vx , vy }) = R3 × R2 the last known position and
      velocity reported by the ATC.
    • RDF sensor 1 : S(U3 ) = S({θ1 , t}) = S 1 × R bearing and time of beacon’s
      signal as reported by amateur operator 1.
    • RDF sensor 2 : S(U4 ) = S({θ2 , t}) = S 1 × R bearing and time of beacon’s
      signal as reported by amateur operator 2.
    • Satellite: S(U5 ) = S({s, θ1 , θ2 }) = R2 object detection from satellite im-
      age. We could have equally well chosen S(U5 ) to be the space of raw gray
      scale images C([0, 1] × [0, 1], R) or R3mn , but following standard practice
      in wide-area search, we assume that the image has already been processed
      into a list of candidate object detections,6 each of which consists of a
      latitude and longitude only.
    • Field office: S(X) = S({x, y, z, t, vx , vy , θ1 , θ2 , s}) = R3 × R2 × R last
      known position, last known velocity, time of beacon, and satellite image.
      We note that because the satellite image has been processed into object
      detections, the unprocessed image is not represented in the attribute space.
For those open sets associated to intersections, the spaces of observations are
easy to specify by reading off the entities in the open sets:
   1. S({t}) = R, the time of the crash,
   2. S({θ1 }) = S 1 , the bearing of the beacon to amateur operator 1, and
   3. S({θ2 }) = S 1 , the bearing of the beacon to amateur operator 2.
But what about sets like {θ1 , θ2 }? There are two obvious possibilities: S 1 × S 1
(two bearings) versus R2 (the intersection of the bearing sight lines). Axiom
4 is mute about which is preferable, but it asserts that we must choose some

   6 If an object detection is consistent with a possible crash site, an analyst would be in-

structed to examine the unprocessed image.


                                             14
set. Each open set formed by unions of the subbase is a place where such a
decision must occur. Since Axioms 5 and 6 completely constrain these spaces
of observations, we will delay their specification until after these Axioms are
specified in Example 15.
Example 10. On an open set U ∩ V corresponding to the intersection between
a camera image U and a radar image V , each observation in S(U ∩ V ) could be
a list of target locations rather than the data from either sensor. If there are n
targets with known locations in R3 , then clearly this space is parameterized by
R3n . If the number of targets is unknown, but is known to be less than n, then
the space of observations would be given by

                                {⊥} t R3 t R6 t · · · R3n

where t represents disjoint union and ⊥ represents the state of having no targets
in the scene, and hence represents a null observation.
    This example indicates that moving from the observations over one open
set to a smaller open set ought to come from a particular transformation that
depends on the sensors involved. Put another way, removing entities of a sensor
domain from consideration should impact the set of observations in a systematic
way.

Axiom 5: It is possible to transform sets of observations to new sets of obser-
    vations by reducing the size of sensor domains.

    • Whenever a pair of sensors assign attributes to open sets of entities U ⊆
      V ⊆ X in the topology T , there is a (fixed) continuous function7

                                  S(U ⊆ V ) : S(V ) → S(U )

      from the pseudometric space of observations over the larger sensor domain
      to the pseudometric space of observations over the smaller one.
    • If U ⊆ V ⊆ W and U ⊆ Y ⊆ W , then

                    S(U ⊆ V ) ◦ S(V ⊆ W ) = S(U ⊆ Y ) ◦ S(Y ⊆ W ),

      which means that we may refer to S(U ⊆ W ) without ambiguity.
    • S(U ⊆ U ) is the identity function.
    • The continuous function S(U ⊆ V ) is called a restriction, because it re-
      stricts observations on an open set V to a subset U .

  7 Notationally, S(U ) is a pseudometric space, but S(U ⊆ V ) is a function between pseudo-

metric spaces. S itself refers to both as a single mathematical object.




                                            15
               X={x,y,z,vx,vy,t,s,θ1,θ2}                                            (X) = ℝ3×ℝ2×ℝ
                                                                         pr1×pr2                       B
                                                                                      A        E
U2={x,y,z,vx,vy}   U3={θ1,t}     U5={s,θ1,θ2}   U4={θ2,t}     (U2)=ℝ3×ℝ2  (U3)=S1×ℝ  (U5)=ℝ2pr  (U4)=S1×ℝ
                                                                                     pr1 pr2       C       2
                                                                   pr1                                 D       pr1
      U1 = {x,y,z} V1={θ1} V3={t} V2={θ2}                           (U1)=ℝ3  (V1)=S1  (V3)=ℝ  (V2)=S1
                        (a)                                                                (b)

Figure 6: Some of restrictions for the search and rescue scenario; to reduce clutter, unions
between open sets are not shown. (a) The open sets and their intersections, where the arrows
indicate subset relations. (b) The spaces of sections, with restrictions shown as arrows. The
restrictions A, B, C, D, and E are defined in Example 11.



     • Any S that satisfies Axioms 1–5 is called a presheaf of pseudometric spaces.
       Analogously, if dU is a metric for all U ∈ T , we say S is a presheaf of metric
       spaces.
    The topology T imposes a lower bound on how small sensor domains can be,
and therefore how finely restrictions are able to discriminate between individual
entities. Generally speaking, one wants the topology to be as small (coarse)
as practical, so that fewer restrictions need to be defined (and later checked)
during the process of fusing data.
Example 11. Continuing with the construction of S from Example 9 for the
search and rescue scenario, restrictions can be constructed as shown in Figure
6, where id represents an identity function and prk represents a projection onto
the k-th factor of a product. Except for the restrictions A, B, C, D, and E, the
restrictions merely extract the spaces of observations for various entities that
are retained when changing open sets. For instance, when relating the entities
as viewed by the ATC to the flight plan, one merely leaves out the velocity
measurements.
    The restrictions A, B, C, D, and E need to perform some geometric compu-
tations to translate between compass bearings and locations. They are defined8
as follows:
                                                                  
                                               −1 x + vx t − r1x
               A(x, y, z, vx , vy , t) =   tan                   ,t ,
                                                  y + vy t − r1y
                                                                  
                                               −1 x + vx t − r2x
               B(x, y, z, vx , vy , t) =   tan                   ,t ,
                                                  y + vy t − r2y
                                                sx − r1x
                        C(sx , sy ) = tan−1               ,
                                                sy − r1y
                                                sx − r2x
                        D(sx , sy ) = tan−1               , and
                                                sy − r2y
               E(x, y, z, vx , vy , t) = (x + vx t, y + vy t)


  8 We are using tan−1 for brevity – really something like the C language atan2 function

would be preferable to obtain angles anywhere on the circle.


                                                        16
                       Subset
                       relation   Sensing domains



                                   Observations
                restriction map


           Coarse topology                                    Finer topology

Figure 7: Cropping an image corresponds to reducing the size of the sensor domain. The
topology determines what crops can be performed as restriction maps: a coarse topology
(left) permits fewer crops than a finer one (right).




where sx , sy are coordinates of an object detected in the satellite image, r1x , r1y
are the coordinates of the first RDF sensor and r2x , r2y are the coordinates of
the second RDF sensor. Note that restrictions involving unions of open sets
are not shown, since we are still waiting to axiomatically constrain them using
Axiom 6 in Example 15.
Example 12. Axiom 5 has quite a clear interpretation for collections of cameras
– the restrictions perform cropping of the domains. The topology T controls
how much cropping is permitted. Figure 7 gives two examples, in which the
topology on the left is smaller than the one on the right. Indeed, if we consider
the topology T1 from Example 8, then a huge number of crops must be defined,
including many that are unnecessary to form a mosaic of the images. However,
the topology T2 from that example requires the modeler to define only those
crops necessary to assemble a mosaic from the images.

    Without constraints on the nature of the restriction functions, it is in general
impossible to combine observations from overlapping sensor domains because
we lack a concrete definition for the sets of observations over unions. Axiom
6 supplies a necessary and sufficient constraint, by requiring there to be an
assignment of observations over a union of sensor domains whenever there are
observations that agree on intersections of sensor domains. Axiom 6 asserts
that this “globalized” observation (a section of S) is unique – a statement of
the underlying determinism of the representation.

Axiom 6: Observations from overlapping sensor domains that are equal upon
    restricting to the intersection of the sensor domains uniquely determine
    an observation from the union of the sensor domains.

   • Suppose that {Uα }α∈I is a collection of sensor domains and there are
     corresponding observations aα ∈ S(Uα ) indexed by α ∈ I taken from each




                                           17
        sensor domain. If the following equation9 is satisfied

                   (S(Uα ∩ Uβ ⊆ Uα )) (aα ) = (S(Uα ∩ Uβ ⊆ Uβ )) (aβ ),

        for all α and β in I, then there is an a ∈ S(∪γ∈I Uγ ) that restricts to each
        aα via
                                 aα = (S(Uα ⊆ ∪Uγ )) (a).

   • Suppose that U is a sensor domain and that a, b ∈ S(U ) are assignments
     of observations to that sensor domain. If these two observations are equal
     on allSsensor domains V in a collection {Vα } for α ∈ I of sensor domains
     with α∈I Vα = U ,

                                 S(V ⊆ U )(a) = S(V ⊆ U )(b),

        then we can conclude10 that a = b.
   • When S satisfies Axioms 1–6, we call S a sheaf of pseudometric spaces.

   In the case of two sensor domains U1 , U2 , Axiom 6 can be visualized as a
pair of commutative diagrams

             U1; ∪ Uc 2                                     S(U1 ∪ U2 )
U1 ⊆U1 ∪U2                U2 ⊆U1 ∪U2       S(U1 ⊆U1 ∪U2 )                 S(U2 ⊆U1 ∪U2 )

                                                   y                             %
 U1 c                          ; U2       S(U1 )                                     S(U2 )

U1 ∩U2 ⊆U1                U1 ∩U2 ⊆U2       S(U1 ∩U2 ⊆U1 )
                                                              %     y S(U1 ∩U2 ⊆U2 )
             U1 ∩ U2                                        S(U1 ∩ U2 )

in which the arrows on the left represent subset relations, while the arrows on
the right represent restriction maps. The Axiom asserts that pairs of elements
on the middle row that restrict to the same element on the bottom row are
themselves restrictions of an element in the top row. Therefore Axiom 6 can
always be satisfied if S(U1 ∪ U2 ) has not been constrained by the sensor models.
One merely needs to define

S(U1 ∪U2 ) = {(x, y) ∈ S(U1 )×S(U2 ) : (S(U1 ∩ U2 ⊆ U1 )) (x) = (S(U1 ∩ U2 ⊆ U2 )) (y)}
                                                                            (1)
and let the restriction maps project out of the product in the diagram above.

  9 This equation is called conjunctivity in the sheaf literature.
 10 A presheaf satisfying this equation is called a monopresheaf.




                                              18
Remark 13. Axiom 6 implies that the sets of observations cannot get larger
as the open sets get smaller. For instance, the diagram

                                  S(U1 ∪ U2 ) = {a}
                             f

                      u                                   id
                                                                 (
          S(U1 ) = {a, c}                                       S(U2 ) = {a}
                                                          id
                             g
                                          )    v
                                  S(U1 ∩ U2 ) = {a}

in which f (a) = a, g(a) = g(c) = a, and id is the identity function violates
Axiom 6. Specifically, Axiom 6 would imply that given that c ∈ S(U1 ) and
a ∈ S(U2 ) both map to a ∈ S(U1 ∩U2 ), there should be an element of S(U1 ∪U2 )
mapping to c ∈ S(U1 ) even though this simply does not occur.
Remark 14. If the observations consist of probability distributions, it is usu-
ally best to think of “equality” in Axiom 6 as being “equality almost surely”
throughout the network of sensors, rather than pointwise equality.

Example 15. It is now possible to complete the definition of the sheaf model
for the search and rescue scenario, picking up where we left off in Example 11.
While enumerating all of the spaces of observations over possible unions in the
topology would be tedious, a few are enlightening.

   • Consider first the case of the union of U1 (flight plan) and U2 (ATC radar),
     for which we have already defined

                                 S(U1 )       = R3 ,
                                 S(U2 )       = R3 × R2 , and
                             U1 ∩ U2          =    U1 .

     Therefore, Equation (1) defines

                            S(U1 ∪ U2 ) = S(U2 ) = R3 × R2 .

   • For the union of U1 (flight plan) and U3 (RDF sensor 1), we have that
     U1 ∩ U3 = ∅, so Equation (1) defines

                   S(U1 ∪ U3 ) = S(U1 ) × S(U3 ) = R3 × S 1 × R.

   • Finally, the open sets U3 , U4 corresponding to the two RDF sensors have
     U3 ∩ U4 = {t}. In Example 9, we defined S({t}) = R to represent the time
     of the crash measured by both beacons. Thus Equation (1) constructs

                              S(U3 ∪ U4 ) = S 1 × R × S 1 ,


                                              19
 U1∪U2                crop ℝ3(2MN-mn) crop                               ℝ3MN×ℝ4                                      ℝ3MN×ℝ
                      left                                  pr1                                  f×id          id                   g
                                      right
U1         U2          ℝ3MN           ℝ3MN                 ℝ3MN                              ℝ4×ℝ4          ℝ3MN                    ℝ2
                      crop           crop                           f                            pr2           g                   pr2
 U1∩U2                lower     ℝ3mn upper                                        ℝ4                                         ℝ
                      right          left
     (a)                       (b)                                                (c)                                    (d)
Figure 8: Sheaf models for three ways to combine information about coins on a table. (a)
The topology for two overlapping camera fields of view. (b) Mosaicing the images directly.
(c) processing the right image with object-level classifications. (d) processing the right image
into the total value of the coins.




                                              (                     2 quarters
                                                               , 00 dimes
                                                                    nickels
                                                                    1 penny   (                        (       , $0.51
                                                                                                                         (
                                                              ( (
                                                                    2 quarters inside overlap
                                                                    0 dimes inside overlap
                                                                    1 nickel inside overlap
                                                                    1 penny inside overlap
                                                                    2 quarters outside overlap
                                                                    0 dimes outside overlap
                                                                                                               (   $0.51 outside overlap
                                                                                                                   $0.56 inside overlap (
                                                                    0 nickels outside overlap
                                                                    1 penny outside overlap




                                                       ( (
                                                       2 quarters
                                                       0 dimes
                                                       1 nickel
                                                       1 penny
                                                                                                           $0.56


  (a)                   (b)                            (c)                                                 (d)
Figure 9: Three possible ways to combine information about coins on a table. (a) The original
images. (b) forming the mosaic of two images, with no further interpretation. (c) fusing an
image with object-level classifications, but no interpretation. (d) combining an image with
the total value of the coins, which requires interpretation of objects in the scene.




                                                  20
      which represents both bearings and the common time from the two RDF
      sensors. Global sections over U3 ∪ U4 explicitly assert that the two sensors
      are in agreement about the time the beacon was sounded. If the two
      sensors do not agree, this cannot correspond to a global section!

   With Axiom 6, it becomes possible to draw global inferences from data
specified locally.
Example 16. Referring to the topology T2 shown Figure 8(a) (also in Figure
5(b)), we again consider the problem of counting coins on the table. Assume that
there are three different types of coins: pennies, nickels, dimes, and quarters.
Three different possibilities for processing chains lead to three distinct sheaves,
shown in Figure 8:
  1. No processing aside from image registration (Figure 8(b)),
  2. Leaving one image (on the left) alone while running an object classifier on
     the other (Figure 8(c)) in which the restriction f computes the number of
     coins of each type present in the image, or
  3. Leaving one image (again on the left) alone, while running a different
     process g that computes the total monetary value within an image (Figure
     8(d)).
Notice that in the latter two cases, the observation in the intersection is not
an image, but something rather more processed. Given that f and g actually
perform the processing required of them, it is easy to verify that Axiom 6 will
hold for each sheaf merely by verifying that Equation 1 is satisfied over the
unions.
    Starting with the original pair of images in Figure 9(a), which constitute
observations over U1 and U2 in the sheaf in Figure 8(b), Figure 9(b) shows the
corresponding global section. In the case of the sheaves shown in Figures 8(c)
and 8(d) we can still use the image as an observation over U1 . However, the
image that was an observation over U2 must be processed into object detections
or a total dollar amount before it can constitute an observation for the sheaves in
Figures 8(c) and 8(d). Once that is done, then Figures 9(c) and 9(d) constitute
the resulting global sections that are guaranteed to exist by Axiom 6.
    The previous examples show that observations over some of the sensor do-
mains can be used to infer observations over all other sensor domains when
there is self consistency among the observations. This extrapolation of obser-
vations into other sensor domains is the hallmark of a data fusion process, but
depends on restrictions of observations being exactly equal on intersections of
sensor domains. Of course, this is quite unrealistic! In Section 4 we argue that
data fusion consists of the process of identifying the global section that is the
“best match” to the available data.
    Sometimes, as the next example shows, problems arise when the integrated
sensor system does not satisfy Axiom 6.



                                        21
                                           Join of Tables 1 and 2
                                 Name Flight Start Destination Miles Status
                                 Bob 123 DCA SYR               300 Econ
                  Table 1:                                              Table 2:
        Name Flight Start Destination                               Name Miles Status
        Bob 123 DCA SYR                                             Bob 300 Econ
        Mary 345 ORD ATL                                            Mike 1200 Bus
                                    Common columns of Tables 1 and 2
                                                  Name
                                                  Bob
                                                  Mary
                                                  Mike

Figure 10: The diagram of the sheaf modeling two tables in a passenger database owned by
an airline.



Example 17. Real world examples of relational databases often do not satisfy
Axiom 6, which is sometimes a source of problems. Consider a database with
two tables like so:
   1. a table whose columns are passenger names, flight numbers, a starting
      airport, and a destination airport, and
   2. a table whose columns are passenger names, frequent flier miles, and flier
      upgrade status.
The two tables are shown at left and right middle in Figure 10. The restrictions
(shown by arrows in the Figure) correspond to projecting out the columns to
form subtables. Axiom 6 ensures that if the two tables each have a row with the
same passenger’s name, then there really is at least one passenger with all of
the associated attributes (start, destination, miles, and status). This is a table
join operation: rows from the two tables that match correspond to rows in the
joined table. Axiom 6 also ensures that there is exactly one such passenger, so
in Figure 10 this means that “Bob” in Table 1 really is the same as “Bob” in
Table 2. From personal experience – the author has a relatively common name
– Axiom 6 does not hold for some airlines.

4. Data fusion and quality assessment

    The previous section discussed how the relationships between sensors and
their possible spaces of observations fit together into an integrated sensor sys-
tem. Using the formal model of a sensor system as a presheaf S (satisfying
Axioms 1–5), it becomes possible to talk about combining the data from sensors
into a more unified perspective. The idea is that if two sensors describe over-
lapping sets of entities, their observations can be combined when they “agree”
on the common entities. Since realistic data contains errors and uncertainties,
it is rarely the case that “agreement” will be exact. This suggests formalizing


                                            22
the distance between assignments, which has the structure of a pseudometric
space.
                                            Q
Definition 18. The space of assignments U ∈T S(U ) has a pseudometric,
which is given by
                        D(a, b) = sup dU (a(U ), b(U ))
                                     U ∈T

for two assignments a, b of S.
    Two assignments are close to one another whenever they consist of observa-
tions that are close in all sensor domains. In Example 9, assignments consist
of one report from each sensor, each intersection, and from the field office. We
should expect that the reports ought to be related – especially between a pair
of sensors and their joint report on the same entities – so if one such report is
awry, we should suspect that something may be amiss. Therefore, the central
problem we must address is an optimization.
                                                          Q
Problem 19. (Data Fusion) Given an assignment a ∈ U ∈T S(U ), find the
nearest global section s of S, namely construct

   argmins∈S(X) D(s, a)    =     argmins∈S(X) sup dU (a(U ), s(U ))
                                               U ∈T
                           =     argmins∈S(X) sup dU (a(U ), (S(U ⊆ X)) (s)).
                                               U ∈T

    The constraint s ∈ S(X) on the argmin means that the optimization must
proceed over all global sections of the presheaf S. Thus, the presheaf structure
will usually play a substantial role in constraining the solutions of Problem 19
through its space of global sections. As a practical matter, this means that
the space of global sections must be determined before one can perform the
optimization. The global sections are easily found by inspection in most of
the examples in this article, as demonstrated in Examples 15 – 17. For more
complicated situations, provided one has a sheaf of vector spaces (and not just
a presheaf), the space of global sections can be computed via linear algebra (see
Proposition 28 in Section 5). Without the presheaf structure, it is impossible
to even pose Problem 19!
    If each set of observations lies in a vector space, then Data Fusion is an op-
timization over vector spaces, which a well-studied and well-understood setting.
Our contribution is an appropriate pseudometric, which will depend intimately
on the presheaf S. If any set of observations is not a vector space, then Data
Fusion will need to be solved by some other optimization method. Regardless,
solving Data Fusion on a coarser topology is easier than on a finer one, since
coarser topologies have fewer open sets.
    In order to understand conditions under which this Problem may be solved,
we make the following definition to quantify the self-consistency of an assign-
ment.




                                        23
Definition 20. An -approximate
                      Q         section for a presheaf of pseudometric spaces
S is an assignment s ∈ U ∈T S(U ) for which

                            dV (s(V ), S(V ⊆ U )s(U )) ≤ 
                                                                       Q
for all V ⊆ U . The minimum value of  for which an assignment s ∈       U ∈T S(U )
is an -approximate section is called the consistency radius of s.
    Smaller consistency radii imply better agreement amongst sensors. Theo-
retically, the best one can do is exact equality, in which approximate sections
closely correspond to global sections.
Proposition 21. If S is a presheaf of pseudometric spaces, every global section
s ∈ S(X) induces a 0-approximate section of S. Furthermore, if S is a presheaf
of metric spaces then this correspondence is a homeomorphism.
Proof. To prove Q the first statement, it suffices to construct the other components
in the product U ∈T S(U ) by applying each restriction S(U ⊆ X) to s for
U ∈ T . Since dU is a pseudometric, the distance between each such component
 will vanish by construction.
     Observe that this defines an injective function i taking global sections to
 0-approximate sections. To prove the second statement, we need only construct
 an inverse to i when S is a presheaf of metric spaces. To that end, suppose that
sQis instead a 0-approximate section of S. Since s is an element of the product
   U ∈T S(U ), we can apply the projection
                                   Y
                                j:      S(U ) → S(X)
                                  U ∈T

to obtain a global section j(s) = s(X) since X ∈ T . It is clear that j ◦ i is the
identity function. Since we have that s is a 0-approximate section, then

                        0    = dV (s(V ), S(V ⊆ X)s(X))
                             = dV (s(V ), S(V ⊆ X)j(s))
                             = dV (s(V ), i(j(s))V )


for all V ∈ T , which implies that s(V ) = i(j(s))V because dV is a metric.
Therefore i ◦ j is the identity function, and the proof is complete.
Remark 22. The technical distinction between the 0-approximate sections of
presheaves of metric spaces and presheaves of pseudometric spaces runs quite
deep. Since the space of 0-approximate sections is closed, the subspace of global
sections is also closed in a presheaf of metric spaces, but not necessarily so in a
presheaf of pseudometric spaces. Consider the topology T = {∅, {1}, {1, 2}} on
the two-point set X = {1, 2} and the presheaf P defined by the diagram

                    P({1, 2}) = {a, b}
                                          id   / P({1}) = {a, b}.


                                         24
There exactly two global sections of P, yet if the trivial pseudometric11 is applied
to all sensor domains, then there are four 0-approximate sections. Each of these
approximate sections are limit points of the subspace of global sections, which
shows that it is not closed. (As the reader may verify, P also satisfies Axiom 6,
it is therefore a sheaf.)

    The consistency radius of an assignment is an obstruction to it being a global
section, as the following Proposition asserts.
Proposition 23. If a is an -approximate section of a presheaf P of pseudomet-
ric spaces whose restrictions are Lipschitz continuous functions with Lipschitz
constant K, then the distance (Definition 18) between a and the nearest global
                          
section to a is at least 1+K .
   Assignments that are highly consistent (they have low consistency radius)
are therefore easier to fuse via an optimization like Problem 19.
Proof. Suppose that s is any global section of P and that V ⊆ U ∈ T are open
sets. Then the consistency radius is the supremum of all distances of the form

dV (a(V ), P(V ⊆ U )a(U )) ≤ dV (a(V ), P(V ⊆ U )s(U )) +
                                      dV (P(V ⊆ U )s(U ), P(V ⊆ U )a(U ))
                                ≤     dV (a(V ), s(V )) + dV (s(V ), P(V ⊆ U )s(U )) +
                                      dV (P(V ⊆ U )s(U ), P(V ⊆ U )a(U ))
                                ≤     dV (a(V ), s(V )) + dV (P(V ⊆ U )s(U ), P(V ⊆ U )a(U ))
                                ≤     (1 + K)dV (a(V ), s(V )).

Thus, taking supremums of both sides yields

                                     ≤ (1 + K)D(a, s),

which completes the argument.

Example 24. Consider again the search and rescue scenario, recalling that we
have constructed a sheaf model for the integrated sensor system in Examples 11
and 15. The data shown in Table 1 and Figures 11–13 were simulated to repre-
sent typical values for the sensors we deployed. To constitute the flight plan, we
used an actual flight path [51] for Lufthansa flight 417. Locations and operating
ranges of ATC radars were taken from Air Force document AFD-090615-023.
The crash location was specified manually at 44.24545◦ N, 64.63672◦ W. The
crash location was withheld from the data presented to the sheaf model, so that
the output of its data fusion could be compared to the true value. The two
RDF sensors were placed at

 11 All attributes are distance 0 apart in the trivial pseudometric.




                                             25
              Table 1: Table of observations for Example 24.
  Sensor          Entity     Case 1        Case 2     Case 3       Units
                                                                    ◦
Flight plan         x        70.662        70.663     70.612          W
                                                                    ◦
                    y        42.829        42.752     42.834          N
                    z        11178         11299      11237          m
                                                                    ◦
    ATC             x        70.587        70.657     70.617          W
                                                                    ◦
                    y        42.741        42.773     42.834          N
                    z        11346         11346      11236          m
                   vx         -495          -495       -419      km/h W
                   vy          164           164        310      km/h N
                                                                 ◦
   RDF 1           θ1         77.1           77.2      77.2        true N
                    t         0.943         0.930      0.985          h
                                                                 ◦
   RDF 2           θ2         61.3           63.2      63.3        true N
                    t         0.890         0.974      1.05           h
    Sat             s       (image)
                                                                   ◦
                   sx        64.599        64.630      62.742        W
                                                                   ◦
                   sy        44.243        44.287      44.550        N
                                                                   ◦
   Field            x        70.649        70.668      70.626        W
                                                                   ◦
                    y        42.753        42.809      42.814        N
                    z        11220          11431      11239        m
                   vx         -495           -495       -419     km/h W
                   vy          164           164        311      km/h N
                    t         0.928          1.05       1.02         h
                                                                   ◦
 Crash est.         x       65.0013        64.2396    65.3745        W
                                                                   ◦
                    y       44.1277        44.3721    45.6703        N
Consist. rad.                 15.7           11.6       152        km
   Error                      16.1           17.3       193        km




                  Table 2: Fused results for Example 24
   Sensor       Entity     Case 1         Case 2     Case 3      Units
                                                                  ◦
    Field         x        70.9391        71.8296    75.7569        W
                                                                  ◦
                  y        42.7849        42.7806    42.5831        N
                  z         10963          11730      12452        m
                 vx         -493.6         -497.2     -436.6    km/h W
                 vy          168.6         162.2       280.9    km/h N
                  t          0.952          1.04       0.872        h
                                                                  ◦
 Crash est.       x        65.1704        65.4553    71.0939        W
                                                                  ◦
                  y        44.2307        44.3069    44.7919        N
   Error                     2.01           8.38        74.4      km




                                     26
                                                                                                  Satellite object detection
                                                                    ATC last known track
                        (X) = ℝ3×ℝ2×ℝ                          Sight line from RF 1
                                                                                                          Crash location
            1.7 km                                 0.2°
                         0.5°
                                15 km                                                            Sight line from RF 2
 (U2)=ℝ3×ℝ2  (U3)=S1×ℝ  (U5)=ℝ2  (U4)=S1×ℝ                  Flight plan                      Field oﬃce dead
                                     0.1°           0h
                                            0.1°                track                            reckoning estimate
    12 km              0° 0.04 h
                                                          0°                          ATC last known position

       (U1)=ℝ3  (V1)=S1  (V3)=ℝ  (V2)=S1                                  ATC maximum range circle


                               (a)                                                       (b)

   Figure 11: Case 1 in Example 24: (a) Errors in the presheaf model (b) Spatial layout.




                                                                                                Satellite object detection
                                                                    ATC last known track
                        (X) = ℝ3×ℝ2×ℝ                          Sight line from RF 1
                                                                                                          Crash location
            5 km                                   2°
                         0.5°
                                12 km                                                             Sight line from RF 2
 (U2)=ℝ3×ℝ2  (U3)=S1×ℝ  (U5)=ℝ2  (U4)=S1×ℝ                  Flight plan                       Field oﬃce dead
                                     0.4°           0h
                                            2.1°                track                             reckoning estimate
   2.8 km              0° 0.04 h
                                                          0°                           ATC last known position

       (U1)=ℝ3  (V1)=S1  (V3)=ℝ  (V2)=S1                                  ATC maximum range circle


                               (a)                                                       (b)

   Figure 12: Case 2 in Example 24: (a) Errors in the presheaf model (b) Spatial layout.




                                                                                                   Satellite object detection
                                                                    ATC last known track
                        (X) = ℝ3×ℝ2×ℝ                          Sight line from RF 1
                                                                                                          Crash location
            2.9 km                                 9.7°
                         13°
                                152 km                                                            Sight line from RF 2
 (U2)=ℝ3×ℝ2  (U3)=S1×ℝ  (U5)=ℝ2  (U4)=S1×ℝ                  Flight plan                       Field oﬃce dead
                                     0.05°          0h
                                             0°                 track                             reckoning estimate
    0 km               0° 0.04 h
                                                          0°                           ATC last known position

       (U1)=ℝ  (V1)=S  (V3)=ℝ  (V2)=S1
                   3             1                                            ATC maximum range circle


                               (a)                                                       (b)

   Figure 13: Case 3 in Example 24: (a) Errors in the presheaf model (b) Spatial layout.




                                                               27
   • The home location for the Rensselaer Polytechnic Amateur radio club sta-
     tion W2SZ (the author was formerly a member) 42.7338328◦ N, 73.662574◦
     W, in upstate New York and
   • The author’s office at the American University Mathematics and Statistics
     department 38.9352387◦ N, 77.0897374◦ W in downtown Washington, DC.

We simulated three distinct cases, in which different errors were applied to the
data. Measurements were perturbed by random errors that are representative
of typical sensors.
    We then solved Problem 19 by searching over the possible global sections to
find the one closest (in the pseudometric from Definition 18) to each case. We
used the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm from the scipy.optimize [52] toolbox
for this optimization. The results are shown in Table 2. The error between the
predicted crash location (using dead reckoning from the last known position and
velocity) improved rather dramatically by fusing the data.

Case 1: (See Figure 11) This case was constructed so that there was only small
    error present in all measurements. Applying dead reckoning to the Field
    office’s data results in a crash location estimate that is 16.1 km from the
    actual crash location. Examining Figure 11(b), it is clear that a crucial
    factor in obtaining this estimate was that the ATC measurement of the
    velocity vector and the RDF sensors’ estimate of the crash time were both
    reliable. Figure 11(a) shows that consistency radius of the assignment
    corresponding to this Case is about 15.7 km, which is fairly close to the
    actual error. A closer examination shows that nearly all the error is con-
    centrated in two places: between the ATC (U2 ) and flight plan (U1 ) and
    between the Field office (X) and the satellite detection (U5 ). The fused
    result exhibits markedly reduced error (a factor of 8× reduced), largely
    since all of the errors were independent and unbiased.
Case 2: (See Figure 12) This case uses nearly the same setup as Case 1, but
    the RDF sensor 2 (from the author’s office) was biased southward by 2◦ .
    This error is immediately detectable in Figure 12(a) as an anomalously
    high error between the Field office (X) and the RDF sensor 2 (U4 ). Since
    the only high errors occur between sensor domains involving RDF sensor
    2 (U4 and V2 ), the sheaf model makes it clear that the errors are due
    exclusively to RDF sensor 2. It should be noted that Figure 12(a) does
    not include any a priori knowledge of the sensor bias. In this Case, the
    Field office did not use the RDF sensors for precise location – only timing
    – so its estimate by dead reckoning is only off by 17.3 km from the actual
    crash location. The consistency radius for this case is slightly smaller, at
    11.6 km. This situation is a classic example of the power of data fusion,
    since the fused result shows that the error due to the biased RDF sensor
    is essentially eliminated by locating the nearest global section. The fused
    result exhibits around a factor of 2× reduction in error.



                                      28
Case 3: (See Figure 13) This case retains the RDF sensor 2 bias from Case 2,
    but also incorrectly records the last known velocity vector as being the
    one specified by the original flight plan. This is fairly realistic as target
    heading estimates near the edge of the usable range of a radar are often
    quite noisy. The consistency radius is easily read from Figure 13(a) as 152
    km. This is definitely an indication that something is amiss, given that
    the error incurred by dead reckoning is visible on Figure 13(c) and is 193
    km. Even so, the fused result is considerably closer to the actual crash
    location, exhibiting somewhat over a factor of 2× lower error.

5. Analysis of integrated sensor systems
    In his Appendix on sheaf theory, Hubbard states [53] “It is fairly easy to
understand what a sheaf is, especially after looking at a few examples. Under-
standing what they are good for is rather harder; indeed, without cohomology
theory, they aren’t good for much.” Although the previous sections of this arti-
cle advocate otherwise, Hubbard makes an important point. Although there are
many co-universal information representations (of which sheaves are one), the
stumbling block for integration approaches is the lack of theoretically-motivated
computational approaches. What sheaf theory provides is a way to perform
controlled algebraic summarization – a weaker set of invariants that still per-
mit certain kinds of inference. In order to perform these summarizations, the
attributes must be specially encoded, which leads to our final Axiom.
Axiom 7: Each space of observations S(U ) has the structure of a Banach space
    (complete normed vector space) and each restriction S(U ⊆ V ) is a con-
    tinuous linear transformation of this Banach space. We call S a sheaf of
    Banach spaces.
Proposition 25. If S is a sheaf of Banach spaces on a finite topology T , then
Problem 19 always has a unique solution, embodied as a projection from the
space of assignments to the space of global sections.
Proof. One need only observe that the metric D on assignments (Definition
18) makes the space of assignments into a Banach space. Specifically, if a ∈
Q
  U ∈T S(U ) is an assignment of S, let

                            kak = max ka(U )kS(U ) ,
                                   U ∈T

where k · kS(U ) is the norm on S(U ). The maximum exists since T is finite.
Then the metric D is given by
                     ka − bk   =   max ka(U ) − b(U )kS(U )
                                   U ∈T
                               =   max dU (a(U ), b(U ))
                                   U ∈T
                               = D(a, b).



                                          29
                                        ℛ(X) = L1(ℝ3×ℝ2×ℝ,ℝ)
                                   d                                                     B'
                                                A'                     E'
       ℛ(U2)=L1(ℝ3×ℝ2,ℝ) ℛ(U3)=L1(S1×ℝ,ℝ) ℛ(U5)=L1(ℝ2,ℝ) ℛ(U4)=L1(S1×ℝ,ℝ)
                 c                              a            b              C' D'             b
                                                                                                    a
                     1
           ℛ(U1)=L (ℝ ,ℝ) ℛ(V1)=L (S ,ℝ) ℛ(V3)=L (ℝ,ℝ) ℛ(V2)=L1(S1,ℝ)
                              3                      1   1                      1



Figure 14: The sheaf in the search and rescue example written using linear stochastic maps.



                                  (X) = L1(ℝ3×ℝ2×ℝ,ℝ)
                             d'                                                     B'
                                       A'                        E'
       (U2)=ℝ3×ℝ2 (U3)=L1(S1×ℝ,ℝ)                                   (U5)=L1(ℝ2,ℝ)              (U4)=L1(S1×ℝ,ℝ)
                                       a            b'                                   b'
           pr1                                                          C' D'                       a
                         3                  1   1
            (U1)=ℝ (V1)=L (S ,ℝ)                                      (V3)=ℝ      (V2)=L1(S1,ℝ)

Figure 15: The sheaf in the search and rescue example written using linear stochastic maps
and means.




    There are a number of additional benefits once Axiom 7 is satisfied, for
instance,
   1. The space of global sections can be computed directly using linear algebra
      (Proposition 28), which greatly simplifies solving the Problem 19, the data
      fusion problem,
   2. There is a canonical collection of invariants, against which all others can
      be compared (Definition 27), and
   3. We need not construct sets of observations over the unions of sensor do-
      mains in order to access these invariants (Theorem 29).

5.1. Preparation: Stochastic observations
    Although Axiom 7 usually does permit reasonable options for restrictions,
it may also be highly constraining. Many effective algorithms that could be
used as restrictions are not linear. Although this seems to dramatically limit
the effectiveness of our subsequent analysis, there is a way out that actually
increases the expressiveness of the model. Specifically, a non-linear restriction
map can be “enriched” into one that is linear [54, 55]. The most concrete of
these enrichments lifts the entities and attributes into a stochastic modeling
framework, as the next Example shows.
Example 26. The sheaf model S defined for the search and rescue scenario
in Example 15 does not satisfy Axiom 7, since the restrictions A, B, C, D,
and E are not linear transformations. A different sheaf model R can instead be
defined that does satisfy Axiom 7, by reinterpreting the attributes as probability


                                                                  30
distributions. The restrictions then all become stochastic maps, all of which are
linear.
    The sheaf R is built upon the same topological space (X, T ) as S, and each
space of observations over an open set open set U ∈ T is replaced by the recipe

                                 R(U ) = L1 (S(U ), R),

where L1 (M, R) is the space of real-valued integrable functions on a measure
space M . We interpret L1 (M, R) as the vector space generated by the proba-
bility distributions on M .
    The appropriate sheaf diagram of R is shown in Figure 14, for which we now
describe the restrictions. Every restriction of S translates into a linear, stochas-
tic map in R according to the following procedure, which we state generally
first and then specialize. Using an arbitrary measurable function f : M → N ,
we can define a function F : L1 (M, R) → L1 (N, R) by the following formula for
each u ∈ L1 (M, R) and y ∈ N
                           Z                   Z
             (F (u)) (y) =         u(x) dx =       u(x)δ(y − f (x)) dx,          (2)
                            f −1 ({y})               M

where δ is the Dirac distribution. If the volume of M is 1, so that
                                   Z
                                       dx = 1,
                                          M

then (2) is precisely Bayes’ rule, and F can be shown to be a stochastic lin-
ear map acting on u, by an appeal to Fubini’s theorem. Specifically, if u is
nonnegative and has integral 1, then F (u) will also have these properties.
    In the case of the restrictions a–d in Figure 14 for R, all of which are pro-
jectors of various sorts, Equation 2 specializes to
                                    Z ∞
                   (a(u)) (θ) =         u(θ, t) dt,
                                          −∞
                                         Z 2π
                    (b(u)) (t)   =       u(θ, t) dθ,
                                    Z0 ∞ Z ∞
              (c(u)) (x, y, z) =               u(x, y, z, vx , vy ) dvx dvy , and
                                     −∞ −∞
                                    Z ∞
       (d(u)) (x, y, z, vx , vy ) =      u(x, y, z, vx , vy , t) dt,
                                          −∞


where we have used u to represent a typical function in the domain of each
restriction.
    Of course, we must also define A0 , B 0 , C 0 , D0 , and E 0 using Equation 2,




                                                31
replacing f with each restriction from S, so we obtain
                       Z Z Z Z ∞
  (A0 (u)) (θ1 , t) =                u(r sin θ1 + r1x − vx t, r cos θ1 + r1y − vy t, z, vx , vy , t) r dr dz dvx dvy ,
                       Z Z Z Z0 ∞
  (B 0 (u)) (θ2 , t) =               u(r sin θ2 + r2x − vx t, r cos θ2 + r2y − vy t, z, vx , vy , t) r dr dz dvx dvy ,
                                 0
                       Z ∞
     (C 0 (u)) (θ1 ) =      u(r sin θ1 + r1x , r cos θ1 + r1y ) r dr,
                       Z0 ∞
    (D0 (u)) (θ2 ) =        u(r sin θ2 + r2x , r cos θ2 + r2y ) r dr,
                        0
                       Z Z Z Z
(E 0 (u)) (sx , sy ) =             u(sx − vx t, sy − vy t, z, vx , vy , t) dz dvx dvy dt,

where (sx , sy ) are coordinates of an object detected in the satellite image,
(r1x , r1y ) are the coordinates of the first RDF sensor and (r2x , r2y ) are the
coordinates of the second RDF sensor.
    It is not strictly necessary to retain probability distributions everywhere
in the sheaf model. Portions of the sheaf in which there were already linear
restrictions can be retained undisturbed by extracting the mean values of the
distributions. This process is not unique, but one possibility is shown in Figure
15, where
                             Z ∞
                   b0 (u) =       t (b(u)) (t) dt
                                    −∞
                                   Z ∞ Z 2π
                               =          tu(θ, t) dθ dt,
                                    −∞ 0
                                   Z Z Z Z Z                                                        
(d0 (u)) (x, y, z, vx , vy )   =                x (d(u)) (x, y, z, vx , vy ) dx dy dz dvx dvy , . . . .

5.2. Computing cohomology
    The sheaf S of vector spaces that results from Axiom 7 has a canonical
family of invariants called cohomology groups H k (S) for k = 0, 1, . . . . In the
most general setting, the cohomology groups can be constructed in various ways
using linear algebraic manipulations, most notably the canonical or Godement
resolution [56][57, II.2]. Instead, we will use a more practical construction,
called Čech cohomology [53, 57].

Definition 27. Suppose U = {U1 , . . . , Un } is a finite open cover for a topolog-
ical space (X, T ), which means that U ⊆ T and ∪U = X. Given a sheaf S of
Banach spaces on T , the k-cochain spaces of S subject to U are given by the
Cartesian products of the stalks over (k + 1)-way intersections of sets in U
                                    Y
                      C k (U; S) =         S(Ui0 ∩ . . . Uik ).
                                         i0 <i1 ···ik




                                                32
Notice that the coordinates of elements of C k (U; S) are indexed by lists of (k+1)
increasing integers to eliminate duplications.
    Beware that the k on C k is merely an index, and that C k does not mean
the space of k-times continuously differentiable functions!
    We also define the k-coboundary map, which is a function dk : C k (U; S) →
  k+1
C     (U; S). This function is defined by specifying its coordinates on an element
a ∈ C k (U; S).
                      k+1
                      X
dk (a)i0 <···ik+1 =         (−1)j S(Ui0 ∩· · · Uik+1 ⊆ Ui0 ∩· · · Uc
                                                                   ij · · · Uik+1 )ai0 <···ibj ···ik+1 ,
                      j=0

where the hat indicates omission from a list.
    It is a standard fact that dk+1 ◦dk = 0, from which we can make the definition
of the k-cohomology spaces

                                H k (U; S) = ker dk /image dk+1 .

We sometimes write H k (S) for H k (T ; S) to reduce notational clutter.
    Although computing H k (T ; S) is a bit difficult, simply due to the number
of dimensions of C k (T ; S), the first consequence of this definition is that the
zeroth cohomology classes are the global sections.
Proposition 28. [58, Thm 4.3] If S is a sheaf of vector spaces on a finite
topology T , then H 0 (T ; S) = ker d0 consists precisely of those assignments s
which are global sections of S.

    Since the C 0 (T ; S) is also the space of assignments, Proposition 25 implies
that the solution to the Data Fusion Problem (Problem 19) is merely a projec-
tion C 0 (T ; S) → H 0 (T ; S).
    Unfortunately, due to the way that H 0 (T ; S) is constructed, S(X) is already
a factor in C 0 (T ; S). This is remedied by the Leray theorem, which allows for
a considerable reduction in complexity by verifying whether a smaller cover U
than the whole topology T still recovers all of the cohomology spaces.
Theorem 29. (Leray theorem, [59] [53, Thm A7.2.6][57, Thm 4.13 in III.4])
Suppose S is a sheaf on T , and that U ⊆ T is a collection of open sets. If for
every intersection U = U0 ∩ · · · Uk of a collection of elements in U it follows
that
                       H k (U ∩ T ; S) = 0 for all k > 0,
then we can conclude that H p (U; S) ∼
                                     = H p (T ; S) for all p.
    Practically speaking, the nontrivial elements of H k for k > 0 represent
obstructions to consistent sensor data. They indicate situations in which it is
impossible for an assignment to some open sets to be extended to the rest of the
topology. Reading from Definition 27, a nontrivial element of H k (U; S) consists
of a joint collection of observations on the k-way intersections of sensor domains


                                                   33
                                                       Finger present




                             inger present

                                                       U3
                                                              ?? ≠
                               U1


                Finger out
                of scene
                                             U2


                                                                        Finger not present




         Figure 16: A collection of images in a nontrivial H 1 cohomology class.




in U that are consistent upon further restriction to (k + 1)-way intersections,
but do not arise from any joint observations from (k − 1)-way intersections.
They are therefore certain classes of partially self-consistent data that cannot
be extended to global sections. From a data fusion standpoint, they may be
considered solutions to Problem 19 on only part of the space, but these solutions
cannot be extended to all of the space without incurring distortion.
    When situations with nontrivial H k for k > 0 arise in practice they usually
indicate a failure of the model to correspond to reality. For instance, in all of
the mosaic-forming examples discussed in this article, there has been an implicit
assumption that all images were acquired at the same time. When time evolves
between imaging events, nontrivial H k elements indicate that inconsistency can
easily arise, as Example 30 shows.
Example 30. Consider the collection of photographs shown in Figure 16. Con-
sider the sheaf S for the three sensor domains U = {Ui } as shown, where the
observations consist of various spaces of images and the restrictions consist of
image cropping operations, as in Examples 8 and 16.
     Consider the two assignments consisting of the photograph on the left (on U1 )
and the bottom (U2 ) and one of the photographs on the right (U3 ). Neither of
these assignments correspond to a global section, because one of the restriction
maps out of U3 will result in a disagreement on one of its intersections with the
other two sets. In particular, the set of photographs shown on the intersections
could not possibly have arisen by restricting any assignment of photographs
to the elements of the cover, that is, the image through d1 of an element of
C 0 (U; S). Therefore, the assignment of photographs to the intersections shown
in Figure 16 is an example of a nontrivial class in H 1 (T ; S) since there are no


                                                  34
                 Original images                     Obstacle removed




                  Left         Right                     Left         Right

             Figure 17: Trying to see behind a book with two different views.




nonempty intersections between all three sensor domains.
    In light of Definition 27 and the example, we may be tempted to add more
sensors to our collection to try to resolve the ambiguity. The essential fact is
that without bringing time into the model of mosaic-forming, problems still can
arise. Under fairly general conditions, such as those in the above example, the
collection of sensors contains all of the possible information as is truly encoded
by the model.
Example 31. Consider the case of trying to use a collection of sensors to piece
together what is behind an obstacle. This occurs in optical systems as well as
those based on radio or sound propagation. Usually, the process involves taking
collections of images from several angles followed by an obstacle-removal step.
If not enough looks are obtained from enough angles, then it will not be possible
to infer anything from behind the obstacle. However, if the sensors’ locations
are not well known, it may be impossible to detect that this has occurred. This
is an effect of a difference between the sensors’ view of H 1 (U; S) and the actual
H 1 (T ; S).
    Figure 17 shows the process for trying to see behind a book using two views.
The original photographs on the left show the scene, while the photos on the
right show the obstacle removed. Suppose that X consists of the following
entities: L for the left camera, R for the right camera, V1 for the upper overlap,
and V2 for the lower overlap. That is,

                                  X = {R, L, V1 , V2 }.

There is a natural topology for the sensors, namely

             T = {{R, V1 , V2 }, {L, V1 , V2 }, {V1 , V2 }, {V1 }, {V2 }, X, ∅}

in which the overlaps are separated. Modeling the cameras as U = {UL , UR }
where UL = {L, V1 , V2 }, UR = {R, V1 , V2 }, we obtain the following sheaf M
associated to the topology generated by U:

                    ;Xc                                         R3m ⊕ R3n

                                                     y                            %
      UL o       {V1 , V2 }       / UR         R3m              / R3p ⊕ R3q o         R3n


                                            35
                                           X                      ( )
                                                                  100
                                                                  010
                                                                              3
                                                                                  ( )
                                                                                  010
                                                                                  001
                       V1
                                                                       2                2
                                     UL          UR
                               UR
                  UL                  {V1,V2}                     (00 11)     2
                                                                                  (11 00)
                       V2                                                         (0 1)
                                                                  (1 0)
                                     V1          V2
                       (a)                 (b)                              (c)

Figure 18: The sheaf for Example 32. (a) A representation of the topological space T in
Examples 31 and 32. (b) The open sets in the topology. (c) The sheaf P and its restrictions.




where m is the number of pixels in the left image, n is the number of pixels
in the right image, p is the number of pixels in the upper overlap region, and
q is the number of pixels in the lower overlap region. Since the overlap region
consists of two connected components, does this impact the mosaic process? It
does not, according to Theorem 29, though this requires a little calculation. It
is clear the only place we need to be concerned is the overlap. So we need to
examine the intersection UL ∩ UR = {V1 , V2 } and compute

                                           H k (V; M),

where V = {{V1 , V2 }, {V1 }, {V2 }}. The sheaf diagram for this (with the sets of
V below for clarity) is
                                                            pr2
                             R3p o   pr1
                                           R3p ⊕ R3q               / R3q



                             {V1 }         / {V1 , V2 } o           {V2 }

which is easily computed to have dim H k (V; M) = 0 for k > 0. (In the diagram,
prk is the projection onto the k-th factor of a product and id is the identity map.)
    The above example shows that solving a data fusion problem applied to
relatively unprocessed data works well.12 It also works if data are processed a
bit more, as the next (and final) example shows.
Example 32. Suppose instead that we are interested not in the images them-
selves but rather whether a single object is in the scene. Like the previous
example the scene can be divided into several regions, each represented by an
entity with the topology T . If we attempt to quantify the probability that the
object is in the left, right, or middle of the scene, the space of observations
over UL (or UR ) is R2 , whose two components should be interpreted as the


  12 It works well up to the limit of having enough agreement between the sensors to deduce

the overlaps, of course. This is not necessarily easy!


                                                  36
probability that an object is present on the left (or right) and in the overlap.
We are led to consider a sheaf P on T that keeps track of whether there is
an object on the left, right, or middle of the scene as shown in Figure 18(c).
As before, if U = {UL , UR } where UL = {L, V1 , V2 }, UR = {R, V1 , V2 }, then
dim H 0 (U; P) = 3, indicating the three probability values for the left, right, and
middle of the scene. However, unlike the Example 31, dim H 1 (U; P) = 1, which
indicates that there can be data that are locally self-consistent, but not glob-
ally self-consistent. This corresponds to the situation where there are different
probabilities for the object’s presence in V1 and V2 – both variants of the middle
region – yet the global model only discerns a single probability for the middle
region.
    We can confirm that this is not an artifact by examining the refined cover
V = {{V1 , V2 }, {V1 }, {V2 }} as in the previous example, and are once again led
to the fact that dim H k (V; P) = 0 for k > 0.
    The presence of nontrivial cohomology in H 1 arising after performing some
data processing indicates that the processing has lost information at a global
level, but that this information is still possible to detect with individual sensors.
This strongly advocates for performing fusion as close to the sensors as possible,
to avoid unexpected correlations across sensor domains due to inconsistent pro-
cessing. This view is shared by others, for instance [28], though in some cases
the artifacts can be anticipated. For instance, [60] shows how to use spectral
sequences to compensate for when the hypotheses of Theorem 29 are known to
fail. As a special case for graphs, [37] and [58, Sec 4.7] contain an algorithmic
approach that is somewhat simpler.


6. Conclusions and new frontiers

    This article has demonstrated that sheaves are an effective theoretical tool
for constructing and exploiting integrated systems of sensors in a bottom-up,
data-driven way. By constructing sheaf models of integrated sensor systems, one
can use them as a basis for solving data fusion problems driven by sensor data.
One can also apply cohomology as a tool to identify features of the integrated
system as a whole, which could be useful for sensor deployment planning.
    There are several mathematical frontiers that are opened by repurposing
sheaf theory for information integration. For instance, although we have fo-
cused on global sections and obstructions to them, the combinatorics of local
sections is essentially not studied. The extension of observations to global sec-
tions arises in many important problems. In homogeneous data situations, such
as the reconstruction of signals from samples [61] and the solution of differential
equations [62], sheaves are already useful. The generality afforded by sheaves
indicates that problems of this sort can also be addressed when the data types
are not homogeneous. Although persistent homology has received considerable
recent attention in exploratory data analysis, persistent cohomology [63] has
shown promise in signal processing and is a sheaf [58].



                                         37
    Although the examples in this article were large enough to be useful on their
own, there is also considerable work to be done to address larger collections of
sensors. Although solving the data fusion problem is straightforward compu-
tationally, computing cohomology can require significant computing resources.
In homology calculations, the notion of collapses and reductions are essential
for making computation practical. A similar methodology – based on discrete
Morse theory [64] – exists for computing sheaf cohomology. In either case (re-
duced or not), efficient finite field linear algebra could be an enabler. Finally,
practical categorification [55] is still very much an art, and has a large impact
on practical performance of sheaf-based information integration systems that
rely on cohomology.


Acknowledgment

    The author would like to thank the anonymous referees for their insightful
comments and questions. This work was partially supported under DARPA
SIMPLEX N66001-15-C-4040. The views, opinions, and/or findings expressed
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official
views or policies of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.

 [1] S. Magnuson, “Military ’swimming in sensors and drowning in data’,” Na-
     tional Defense, vol. 94, January 2010.
 [2] D. L. Hall, M. McNeese, J. Llinas, and T. Mullen, “A framework for dy-
     namic hard/soft fusion,” in Information Fusion, 2008 11th International
     Conference on, pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2008.
 [3] F. White, “Data fusion lexicon,” Tech. Rep. ADA529661, Joint Directors
     of Laboratories, Washington, DC, October 1991.
 [4] L. Wald, “Some terms of reference in data fusion,” IEEE Trans. Geo-
     sciences and Remote Sensing, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 1190–1193, 1999.
 [5] L. Wald, Data fusion: definitions and architectures: fusion of images of
     different spatial resolutions. Presses des MINES, 2002.
 [6] B. Khaleghi, A. Khamis, F. O. Karray, and S. N. Razavi, “Multisensor
     data fusion: A review of the state-of-the-art,” Information Fusion, vol. 14,
     no. 1, pp. 28–44, 2013.
 [7] P. K. Varshney, “Multisensor data fusion,” Electronics & Communication
     Engineering Journal, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 245–253, 1997.
 [8] L. Alparone, B. Aiazzi, S. Baronti, A. Garzelli, F. Nencini, and M. Selva,
     “Multispectral and panchromatic data fusion assessment without refer-
     ence,” Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing, vol. 74, no. 2,
     pp. 193–200, 2008.



                                        38
 [9] J. Zhang, “Multi-source remote sensing data fusion: status and trends,”
     International Journal of Image and Data Fusion, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–24,
     2010.
[10] S. Dawn, V. Saxena, and B. Sharma, “Remote sensing image registra-
     tion techniques: A survey,” in Image and Signal Processing: 4th Interna-
     tional Conference, ICISP 2010, Trois-Rivières, QC, Canada, June 30-July
     2, 2010. Proceedings (A. Elmoataz, O. Lezoray, F. Nouboud, D. Mammass,
     and J. Meunier, eds.), pp. 103–112, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
     Heidelberg, 2010.
[11] B. Koetz, G. Sun, F. Morsdorf, K. Ranson, M. Kneubhler, K. Itten, and
     B. Allgwer, “Fusion of imaging spectrometer and LIDAR data over com-
     bined radiative transfer models for forest canopy characterization,” Remote
     Sensing of Environment, vol. 106, no. 4, pp. 449 – 459, 2007.
[12] Z. Guo, G. Sun, K. Ranson, W. Ni, and W. Qin, “The potential of com-
     bined LIDAR and SAR data in retrieving forest parameters using model
     analysis,” in Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2008. IGARSS
     2008. IEEE International, vol. 5, pp. V – 542–V – 545, July 2008.
[13] J. Chen, H. Feng, K. Pan, Z. Xu, and Q. Li, “An optimization method
     for registration and mosaicking of remote sensing images,” Optik - Inter-
     national Journal for Light and Electron Optics, vol. 125, no. 2, pp. 697 –
     703, 2014.
[14] J. Euzenat and P. Shvaiko, Ontology Matching. Hiedelberg: Springer-
     Verlag, 2007.
[15] J. Euzenat, A. Ferrara, P. Hollink, A. Isaac, C. Joslyn, V. Malaisé, C. Meil-
     icke, A. Nikolov, J. Pane, M. Sabou, F. Scharffe, P. Shvaiko, V. Spiliopou-
     los, H. Stuckenschmidt, O. Iváb-Zamazal, V. Svátek, C. T. dos Santos,
     G. Vouros, and S. Wang, “Results of the ontology alignment evaluation ini-
     tiative 2009,” in Proc. 4th Int. Wshop. on Ontology Matching (OM-2009),
     CEUR, vol. 551, 2009.
[16] C. Joslyn, P. Paulson, and A. White, “Measuring the structural preserva-
     tion of semantic hierarchy alignments,” in Proc. 4th Int. Wshop. on Ontol-
     ogy Matching (OM-2009), CEUR, vol. 551, 2009.
[17] E. G. Little and G. L. Rogova, “Designing ontologies for higher level fu-
     sion,” Information Fusion, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 70–82, 2009.

[18] J. Hammer, H. Garcia-Molina, J. Cho, R. Aranha, and A. Crespo, “Ex-
     tracting semistructured information from the web,” 1997.
[19] E. Riloff, R. Jones, et al., “Learning dictionaries for information extraction
     by multi-level bootstrapping,” in AAAI/IAAI, pp. 474–479, 1999.



                                        39
[20] M. L. Gregory, L. McGrath, E. B. Bell, K. O’Hara, and K. Domico, “Do-
     main independent knowledge base population from structured and unstruc-
     tured data sources.,” in FLAIRS Conference, 2011.
[21] N. Kushmerick, “Wrapper induction: Efficiency and expressiveness,” Arti-
     ficial Intelligence, vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 15–68, 2000.

[22] G. Jakobson, L. Lewis, and J. Buford, “An approach to integrated cog-
     nitive fusion,” in Proceedings of the 7th ISIF International Conference on
     Information Fusion (FUSION2004), pp. 1210–1217, 2004.
[23] S. Sarawagi, “Information extraction,” Foundations and trends in
     databases, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 261–377, 2008.
[24] E. Waltz, J. Llinas, et al., Multisensor data fusion, vol. 685. Artech house
     Boston, 1990.
[25] M. H. DeGroot, Optimal statistical decisions. Wiley, 2004.

[26] D. L. Hall and S. A. McMullen, Mathematical techniques in multisensor
     data fusion. Artech House, 2004.
[27] D. Smith and S. Singh, “Approaches to multisensor data fusion in target
     tracking: A survey,” Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions
     on, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1696–1710, 2006.

[28] A. J. Newman and G. E. Mitzel, “Upstream data fusion: history, techni-
     cal overview, and applications to critical challenges,” Johns Hopkins APL
     Technical Digest, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 215–233, 2013.
[29] S. M. Alqhtani, S. Luo, and B. Regan, “Multimedia data fusion for event
     detection in twitter by using dempster-shafer evidence theory,” World
     Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, International Journal
     of Computer, Electrical, Automation, Control and Information Engineer-
     ing, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 2234–2238.
[30] J. L. Crowley, “Principles and techniques for sensor data fusion,” in Mul-
     tisensor Fusion for Computer Vision, pp. 15–36, Springer, 1993.

[31] S. Benferhat and C. Sossai, “Reasoning with multiple-source information in
     a possibilistic logic framework,” Information Fusion, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 80–
     96, 2006.
[32] S. Benferhat and F. Titouna, “Fusion and normalization of quantitative
     possibilistic networks,” Applied Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 135–160,
     2009.
[33] D. Balduzzi, “On the information-theoretic structure of distributed mea-
     surements,” EPTCS, vol. 88, pp. 28–42, 2012.



                                       40
[34] S. Thorsen and M. Oxley, “A description of competing fusion systems,”
     Information Fusion, vol. 7, pp. 347–360, December 2006.
[35] K. P. Murphy, Y. Weiss, and M. I. Jordan, “Loopy belief propagation for
     approximate inference: An empirical study,” in Proceedings of the Fifteenth
     conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp. 467–475, Morgan
     Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1999.
[36] J. Lilius, “Sheaf semantics for Petri nets,” tech. rep., Helsinki University
     of Technology, Digital Systems Laboratory, 1993.
[37] M. Robinson, “Imaging geometric graphs using internal measurements,” J.
     Diff. Eqns., vol. 260, pp. 872–896, 2016.
[38] C. Joslyn, E. Hogan, and M. Robinson, “Towards a topological framework
     for integrating semantic information sources,” in Semantic Technologies for
     Intelligence, Defense, and Security (STIDS), 2014.
[39] K. Baclawski, “Whitney numbers of geometric lattices,” Adv. in Math.,
     vol. 16, pp. 125–138, 1975.
[40] K. Baclawski, “Galois connections and the Leray spectral sequence,” Adv.
     Math, vol. 25, pp. 191–215, 1977.
[41] A. Shepard, A cellular description of the derived category of a stratified
     space. PhD thesis, Brown University, 1985.
[42] J. Curry, “Sheaves, cosheaves and applications, arxiv:1303.3255,” 2013.
[43] R. Goldblatt, Topoi, the Categorial Analysis of Logic. Dover, 2006.
[44] J. A. Goguen, “Sheaf semantics for concurrent interacting objects,” Math-
     ematical Structures in Computer Science, vol. 2, no. 02, pp. 159–191, 1992.
[45] D. I. Spivak, Category theory for the sciences. MIT Press, 2014.
[46] M. Kokar, J. Tomasik, and J. Weyman, “Formalizing classes of information
     fusion systems,” Information Fusion, vol. 5, pp. 189–202, 2004.

[47] M. M. Kokar, K. Baclawski, and H. Gao, “Category theory-based synthesis
     of a higher-level fusion algorithm: An example,” in Information Fusion,
     2006 9th International Conference on, pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2006.
[48] Australian Transport Safety Bureau, “Considerations on defining the search
     area – MH370,” May 2014.

[49] R. E. Stong, “Finite topological spaces,” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 123,
     pp. 325–340, June 1966.
[50] J. May, “Finite topological spaces: Notes for REU,” 2003.



                                       41
[51] Flightaware.com,          “Lufthansa        (LH)         #417
     –       26-Jul-2016     –        KIAD      -       FRA/EDDF,
     http://flightaware.com/live/flight/dlh417/history/20160726/1925z/kiad/eddf,”
     2016.
[52] T.      S.     community,   “Optimization:       scipy.optimize.”
     http://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/tutorial/optimize.html.
     accessed Sept 15, 2016.
[53] J. H. Hubbard, Teichmüller Theory, volume 1. Matrix Editions, 2006.
[54] M. Robinson, “Asynchronous logic circuits and sheaf obstructions,” Elec-
     tronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, pp. 159–177, 2012.
[55] E. Purvine, M. Robinson, and C. Joslyn, “Categorification in the real
     world,” in Joint Mathematics Meetings, (Seattle, WA), January 2016.
[56] R. Godement, Topologie algebrique et théorie des faisceaux. Paris: Herman,
     1958.

[57] G. Bredon, Sheaf theory. Springer, 1997.
[58] M. Robinson, Topological Signal Processing. Springer, 2014.
[59] J. Leray, “L’anneau spectral et l’anneau filtré d’homologie d’un es-
     pace localement compact et d’une application continue,” Journal des
     Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées, vol. 29, pp. 1–139, 1950.
[60] S. Basu, “Computing the Betti numbers of arrangements via spectral se-
     quences,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 244–
     262, 2003.

[61] M. Robinson, “The Nyquist theorem for cellular sheaves,” in Sampling
     Theory and Applications, (Bremen, Germany), 2013.
[62] L. Ehrenpreis, “Sheaves and differential equations,” Proceedings of the
     American Mathematical Society, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1131–1138, 1956.
[63] V. de Silva, D. Morozov, and M. Vejdemo-Johansson, “Persistent cohomol-
     ogy and circular coordinates,” Discrete & Computational Geometry, vol. 45,
     no. 4, pp. 737–759, 2011.
[64] J. Curry, R. Ghrist, and V. Nanda, “Discrete morse theory for computing
     cellular sheaf cohomology, arxiv:1312.6454,” 2015.




                                      42
