                                                                                                                                                                  1



                                             Rate Distortion for Lossy In-network Linear
                                                     Function Computation and Consensus:
                                                   Distortion Accumulation and Sequential
                                                                          Reverse Water-Filling
arXiv:1601.06224v2 [cs.IT] 13 Jan 2017




                                                                 Yaoqing Yang, Pulkit Grover and Soummya Kar




                                                                                                 Abstract

                                                    We consider the problem of distributed lossy linear function computation in a tree network. We
                                               examine two cases: (i) data aggregation (only one sink node computes) and (ii) consensus (all nodes
                                               compute the same function). By quantifying the accumulation of information loss in distributed comput-
                                               ing, we obtain fundamental limits on network computation rate as a function of incremental distortions
                                               (and hence incremental loss of information) along the edges of the network. The above characterization,
                                               based on quantifying distortion accumulation, offers an improvement over classical cut-set type tech-
                                               niques which are based on overall distortions instead of incremental distortions. This quantification of
                                               information loss qualitatively resembles information dissipation in cascaded channels [1]. Surprisingly,
                                               this accumulation effect of distortion happens even at infinite blocklength. Combining this observation
                                               with an inequality on the dominance of mean-square quantities over relative-entropy quantities, we
                                               obtain outer bounds on the rate distortion function that are tighter than classical cut-set bounds by a
                                               difference which can be arbitrarily large in both data aggregation and consensus. We also obtain inner
                                               bounds on the optimal rate using random Gaussian coding, which differ from the outer bounds by
                                                 √
                                               O( D), where D is the overall distortion. The obtained inner and outer bounds can provide insights


                                           A preliminary version of this work was presented in part at the 53rd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control
                                         and Computing, 2015. This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants CCF-1513936, by ECCS-
                                         1343324 and CCF-1350314 (NSF CAREER) for Pulkit Grover, and by Systems on Nanoscale Information fabriCs (SONIC),
                                         one of the six SRC STARnet Centers, sponsored by MARCO and DARPA.
                                           Y. Yang, P. Grover and S. Kar are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University,
                                         Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. Email: {yyaoqing,pgrover,soummyak}@andrew.cmu.edu.


                                         February 19, 2018                                                                                                   DRAFT
2


           on rate (bit) allocations for both the data aggregation problem and the consensus problem. We show that
           for tree networks, the rate allocation results have a mathematical structure similar to classical reverse
           water-filling for parallel Gaussian sources.



                                                       I. I NTRODUCTION

        The phenomenon of information dissipation [1]–[6] has been of increasing interest recently
from an information-theoretic viewpoint. These results characterize and quantify the gradual loss
of information as it is transmitted through cascaded noisy channels. This study has also yielded
data processing inequalities that are stronger than those used classically [2], [5].
        The dissipation of information cannot be quantified easily using classical information-theoretic
tools that rely on the law of large numbers, because the dissipation of information is often due
to finite-length of codewords and power constraints on the channel inputs [1]. In many classical
network information theory problems, such as relay networks, the dissipation of information is
not observed because it can be suppressed by use of asymptotically infinite blocklengths [1],
[7]1 . However, information dissipation does happen in many problems of communications and
computation. For example, in [4], Evans and Schulman obtain bounds on the information dissi-
pation in noisy circuits, and in [1], Polyanskiy and Wu examine a similar problem in cascaded
AWGN channels with power-constrained inputs. Our earlier works [8], [9] show that under some
conditions, error-correcting codes can be used to overcome information dissipation and achieve
reliable linear computation using unreliable circuit components. In many of these works [1]–[6],
quantifying dissipation of information requires use of tools that go beyond those commonly used
in classical information theory, e.g., cut-set techniques and the data processing inequality.
        Does the information dissipation problem exist in lossy noiseless networks? For lossy com-
pression and communication of a single source over a noiseless line network, information can
be preserved by repeatedly transmitting the same codeword from one end to the other. However,
in this paper, we show that in distributed lossy computation, information does dissipate. We first
study the problem of lossily computing a weighted sum of independent Gaussian sources over a
tree network at an arbitrarily determined sink node. We prove that distortion must accumulate,

    1
        In [7], it is shown that cut set bounds are order-optimal in an arbitrary wireless network with a single source and a single
destination.


DRAFT                                                                                                              February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                            3


and hence information, if measured in the way of mean-square distortion, must dissipate, along
the way from leaves to the sink node due to repeated lossy quantization of distributed data
scattered in the network. In contrast with dissipation results in channel coding [1], [7], this
information loss, measured in mean-square distortion, happens even at infinite blocklength.
Moreover, by quantifying “incremental distortion”, i.e., incremental information loss on each
link of the tree network, we derive an information-theoretic outer bound on the rate distortion
function that is tighter than classical cut-set bounds obtained for this problem in the work of
Cuff, Su and El Gamal [10]. Using the same technique, we improve the classical outer bound
on the sum rate of network consensus (all nodes compute the same linear function) for tree
                        1                                               1
                                                       2
                                                                          
networks from O nlog2 n3/2 D
                               (see [11, Proposition 4]   ) to O nlog 2 D
                                                                            , where n is the number
of nodes in the tree network and D is the required overall distortion. In Remark 3, we provide
the intuition underlying the difference between our bound and the cut-set bound for lossy in-
network computation. Note that although our definition of information loss (measured in terms
of distortion accumulation) is different from that of [1], this definition provides a new perspective
in this line of study.
      A crucial step in our derivation is to bound the difference in differential entropies of two
distributions, where we use the dominance of the mean-square quantities over the quantities
based on relative entropy (see Eq. (90)). This inequality was used by Raginsky and Sason in [12]
(credited to Wu [13]) as a means of proving a weak version of the “HWI inequality” [14] (H, W
and I stand for divergence, Wasserstein distance and Fisher information distance respectively),
which has deep connections with log-Sobolev type inequalities [12].
      In Section III and Section IV, we provide information-theoretic bounds on the rate distortion
function for linear function computation in a tree network, where the function is computed at
an arbitrarily predetermined sink node. For simplicity, we restrict our attention to independent
Gaussian sources. In Section V, we extend our results to the problem of network consensus, in
which all nodes compute the same linear function. In both cases, the difference between the inner
and outer bounds is shown to approach zero in the high-resolution (i.e., zero distortion) limit.
Note that in [10, Section V], the authors show a constant difference between their lower and the


                                                                                                                      3
  2
      Note that the original bound in [11] has a normalization term n1 . The bound in [11] is useful only if D = O(n− 2 ). Our
outer bound is useful for all D.


February 19, 2018                                                                                                      DRAFT
4


inner bounds in the Gaussian case. Using our improved outer bound, we can upper-bound the
difference by O(D1/2 ), where D is the required distortion. Therefore, the inner bound and the
outer bound match in the asymptotic zero-distortion limit. In the special case of a line network,
we show that the rate distortion function is very similar to the reverse water-filling result for
parallel Gaussian sources [15, Theorem 10.3.3].
    The inner bound obtained in this paper is based on random Gaussian codebooks. The main
difficulty here is to bound the overall distortion for random coding in linear function computation.
In order to compute the overall distortion, we quantify a non-trivial equivalence between random-
coding-based estimates and MMSE estimates. Relying on the distortion accumulation result for
MMSE estimates, we equivalently obtain the distortion accumulation result for Gaussian random
codebooks, and hence obtain the overall distortion. This equivalence between random coding and
MMSE is easy to obtain for point-to-point channels, but hard for network function computation,
due to information loss about the exact source distribution after successive quantization. The key
technique is to bound this information loss using bounds on associated KL-divergences, and hence
to show the equivalence between network computation and point-to-point communications. (See
also Remark 5 for details on why our analysis is conceptually different from classical techniques
such as Wyner-Ziv coding and why such new proof techniques are needed.)
    We briefly summarize the main technical contributions of this paper:
    •   we analyze the distortion accumulation effect associated with the incremental distortion,
        and use this to provide an outer bound on the rate-distortion function for linear function
        computation;
    •   we provide an inner bound that matches with the outer bound in the zero distortion limit
        using Gaussian random codebooks; we also quantify the equivalence between random coding
        and MMSE estimates for linear function computation;
    •   we extend the results from linear function computation to the problem of network consensus.


A. Related Works

    Problems of in-network linear function computing have been extensively studied for the goal
of distributed data aggregation and distributed signal processing [16], [17].
    From an information-theoretic and in particular rate-distortion viewpoint, the in-network com-
puting problem is often studied from the perspective of distributed source coding for source

DRAFT                                                                                  February 19, 2018
                                                                                                 5


reconstruction or function computation. The network structures considered include multi-encoder
networks (CEO-type function computing problems) [18]–[20], Gaussian multiple-access net-
works [21], three-node relay networks [22], line or tree networks [23]–[27] or even general
networks in lossless settings [28], [29]. Among these works, [27] considers the problem of lossy
computation in a line network, which is most closely related to our work (ours is lossy compu-
tation in a tree network). However, the result in [27] only characterizes the limit lim − logRD ,
                                                                                    R→∞
where R and D are respectively the overall rate and the overall distortion.
   Our work is also closely related to [10], [11], [30], [31], where outer bounds based on cut-set
techniques [32] are obtained on the rate, or on the computation time, that is required to meet
certain fidelity requirements on linear function computation. Our work is especially inspired by
the works by Su, Cuff and El Gamal [10], [11]. However, we show that many outer bounds
in [10], [11] can be significantly tightened with information-dissipation-inspired techniques
beyond the cut-set bounds (see, for example, [12]). Many recent works improve on cut-set bounds
in certain instances in network information theory, such as the sum capacity of a multi-cast
deterministic network [33] and the capacity region of a multi-cast noisy network [34]. However,
the above-mentioned references do not consider noiseless lossy in-network computation.
   Some previous works on information-theoretic distributed computing also rely on random-
coding-based techniques to provide inner bounds [10], [26]. The achievable schemes in [11]
utilize Gaussian test channels, which also implicitly require random coding arguments. However,
we find it hard to directly analyze the random coding schemes for distributed lossy computing
with Gaussian sources, especially for computing the overall mean-square error of the consensus
value, because we may need to obtain a non-trivial generalization of the “Markov Lemma” [32,
Lecture Notes 13] to Gaussian sources (see Remark 5 for details). However, this generalization
may be cumbersome and not directly related to the main result, the outer bound obtained
using distortion accumulation, in this paper. To overcome this difficulty, we show a non-trivial
equivalence between the estimate based on Gaussian random coding and the estimate based on
MMSE: in the limit of infinite block-length, the MMSE estimate of a Gaussian source given the
codeword generated by Gaussian random coding is just the codeword itself, which means that
the analysis for MMSE is also applicable in the analysis of the random-coding scheme. Further,
for MMSE estimates, we have shown in Section III that the incremental error (incremental
distortion) at different stages of the distributed computation scheme are uncorrelated with each

February 19, 2018                                                                           DRAFT
6


other. Thus, using this property of MMSE estimates, we are able to complete the computation
of the overall distortion for our proposed scheme based on random coding.
        Our work is organized as follows: Section II provides the model and the problem formulation
of distributed lossy function computation; Section III provides the main results of this paper,
which contain the result on distortion accumulation and the information-theoretic outer bound
on the rate-distortion function for distributed lossy computation; Section IV provides the inner
bound using Gaussian random codebooks and using the equivalence between random coding and
MMSE; Section V generalizes the outer and inner bounds to the problem of distributed lossy
network consensus; Section VI concludes the paper. Proofs of various intermediate results are
often relegated to the appendices.

B. Notation and Preliminary Results

        Vectors are written in bold font, e.g., x and y. Sets are written in calligraphic letters, such as S.
Scalar random variables are written in uppercase letters, e.g., U and V . Quantities that measure
mean-square distortions are denoted by D or d with subscripts and superscripts. A Gaussian
distribution with mean µ and covariance Σ is denoted by N (µ, Σ). The all-zero vector with
length N is denoted by 0N , and the N × N identity matrix is denoted by IN .
        The calligraphic letter T = (V, E) is used to represent a tree graph with a node set V = {vi }ni=0
with cardinality n + 1 and an edge set E. In this paper, an edge is always undirected3 . The
neighborhood N (vi ) of a node vi is defined as all the nodes that are connected with vi . A root
node v0 is specified for the tree graph. Since in a tree graph, each node has a unique path to the
root node, for an arbitrary node vi 6= v0 , a unique parent node which is the neighboring node
of vi on the path from vi to v0 can be determined, which is denoted as vPN(i) . The children of
vi are defined as the set of nodes {vj ∈ V | vi = vP N (j) }. The descendants of vi are defined as
the set of nodes that includes all nodes vj that have vi on the unique path from vj to the root
v0 . The set Si is used to denote the set that is constituted by node vi and all the descendants
of vi . As shown in Fig. 1, the set S is constituted by a node vb and its descendants. Thus, in
Fig. 1, S = Sb and va = vPN(b) . When there is no ambiguity, we use v1 , v2 , . . . vd to denote the
children of a particular node vb .

    3
        Although we consider an undirected tree graph, we specify a unique root node, which makes the subsequent definitions on
descendants and children valid.


DRAFT                                                                                                          February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                                  7




                                              root/sink



Fig. 1.   This is an illustration of linear function computation considered in this paper. The goal is to compute a weighted sum
of distributed Gaussian sources over a tree-network. The notation Mb→a denotes the set of bits transmitted from vb to va . The
set S in this figure can also be written as Sb , which denotes the set that contains vb and all its descendants in the network.




   We will obtain scaling bounds on the communication rate. Throughout this paper, we rely on
the family of “big-O” notation [35]. The notation f1 (N ) = O(f2 (N )) and f1 (N ) = Ω(f2 (N ))
respectively mean that f1 (N )/f2 (N ) ≤ C1 and f1 (N )/f2 (N ) ≥ C2 for two positive constants
C1 , C2 and sufficiently large N . By f1 (N ) = Θ(f2 (N )) we mean that f1 (N ) = O(f2 (N )) and
f1 (N ) = Ω(f2 (N )).
   We will use some results on mean-square error estimation. First, we state the orthogonality
principle and the statisticians’ Pythagoras theorem, which we will use frequently in this paper.

Lemma 1. (Pythagoras theorem, [36, Theorem 9.4], [37, Section 8.1]) For a random (vector)
variable X such that E[X > X] < ∞ and a σ-algebra G, the conditional expectation E[X|G]
is a version of the orthogonal projection of X onto the probability space L2 (Ω, G, P): for all
G-measurable (vector) functions Y , it holds that Y ⊥ (X − E[X|G]), or equivalently

                                               h               i
                                              E Y (X − E[X|G])> = 0.                                                          (1)


   Second, we provide a lemma that describes the relationship between the Kullback-Leibler
divergence and the mean-square error under Gaussian smoothing.

Lemma 2. ( [13] [12, Lemma 3.4.2]) Let x and y be a pair of N -dimensional real-valued random

February 19, 2018                                                                                                         DRAFT
8


vectors, and let z ∼ N (0N , IN ) be independent of (x, y). Then, for any t > 0,
                                               1 
                            D Px+√tz ||Py+√tz ≤ E kx − yk22 .
                                                          
                                                                                                    (2)
                                               2t
      Proof: See page 116 of [12]. The proof follows from [13]. However, the proof in [12] is
presented for the case when the vector length N = 1. Thus, we include the complete proof for
general N in Appendix A.


                      II. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

    We consider a linear function computation problem in a tree network T = (V, E). Suppose
each node vi ∈ V observes an independent random vector xi ∼ N (0N , IN ). We assume that
each edge in E is a noiseless bidirectional link, through which bits can be sent. The objective
                                   n
                                   P
is to obtain a weighted sum y =       wi xi at the pre-assigned sink node v0 , which is taken to
                                    i=1
be the root node. In Section V, we will also consider an extension of the problem where the
weighted sum is computed at all nodes.
    Throughout the paper, we assume time is slotted. In each time slot, we assume that only one
node transmits along only one edge. We follow the notion of distributed computation scheme
introduced in [11]. By a distributed computation scheme, we denote a five-tuple (T, S , G , v, e)
described in the following. We use T to denote the total number of time slots, S to denote a
sequence of real mappings S = {ft }Tt=1 , and G to denote a sequence of encoding mappings
G = {gt }Tt=1 . We use v = [v(1), v(2), . . . v(T )] to denote a vector of node indices and e
to denote a vector of edge indices e = [e(1), e(2), . . . e(T )], such that at each time slot t, the
transmitting node v(t) computes the mapping ft (whose arguments are to be made precise below)
and transmits an encoded version gt (ft ) to one of its neighbors through the edge e(t). The only
assumption that we make about the encoding mappings is that each mapping gt outputs a binary
sequence of a finite length. The arguments of ft may consist of all the information available
at the transmitting node v(t) up to time t, including its observation xv(t) , randomly generated
data, and information obtained from its neighborhood up to time t. Note that the total number
of time slots T can be greater than number of vertices n in general, i.e., nodes may be allowed
to transmit multiple times. For an arbitrary link vi → vj , define Mi→j as all the bits transmitted
on the link vi → vj (see Fig. 1). Denote by Ri→j the number of bits in Mi→j normalized by N .
Note that Ri→j is the (normalized) total number of bits transmitted possibly over multiple time

DRAFT                                                                                  February 19, 2018
                                                                                                   9


slots to node vj . Also note that Ri→j > 0 only if vi and vj are connected. By sum rate R, we
mean the total number of bits communicated in the distributed computation scheme normalized
by N . Since we only consider tree graphs,
                          n                                n
                       1 X                                X
                    R=       (N Ri→PN(i) + N RPN(i)→i ) =     (Ri→PN(i) + RPN(i)→i ).            (3)
                       N i=1                              i=1

We only consider oblivious distributed computation schemes, i.e., the five-tuple (T, S , G , v, e)
is fixed and does not change with inputs. Further, we assume that a scheme terminates in finite
time, i.e., T < ∞. A scheme must be feasible, i.e., all arguments of ft should be available in
v(t) before time t. Denote by F the set of all feasible oblivious distributed computation schemes
(five-tuples). Although a feasible scheme is general, in that it allows a given edge e to be active
at multiple (non-consecutive) slots, our inner bound scheme is based on a sequential scheduling,
where each node transmits to its parent node only once.
                                    Pn
  Since the goal is to compute y =     wi xi at the sink node v0 , without loss of generality, we
                                         i=1
assume v(T ) = v0 and the output of the mapping f (T ) computed at v(T ) is the final estimate
b. Denote by D the overall (normalized) mean-square distortion
y
                                                1 
                                                         bk22 .
                                                             
                                         D=       E ky − y                                       (4)
                                                N
The objective is to compute the minimum value of the sum rate R (defined in (3)) such that the
overall distortion is smaller than Dtar .
                                                 min          R,
                                            (T,S ,G ,v,e)∈F
                                                                                                 (5)
                                                              tar
                                                 s.t. D ≤ D .
   In what follows, we define some quantities associated with the “incremental distortion” that
                                                                     P
we mentioned in Section I. For an arbitrary set S ⊂ V, define yS =        wj xj as the partial sum
                                                                    vj ∈S
in S. We use σS2 =     wj2 to denote the variance of each entry of yS . Suppose at the final time
                    P
                        vj ∈S
slot T , all the available information (observations of random variables) at a node vi ∈ V is Ii .
            mmse
Denote by y
          bS,i   the MMSE estimate of yS at any node vi , given the information Ii , which can
be written as
                                              mmse
                                            y
                                            bS,i   = E [yS |Ii ] .                               (6)

For an arbitrary (non-sink) node vi and its parent node vPN(i) , denote by DiTx and DiRx the MMSE
distortions of estimating ySi , respectively at vi and vPN(i) , where, recall, Si denotes the set of

February 19, 2018                                                                             DRAFT
10


descendants of node vi (including itself). The information about ySi should be transmitted from
vi to its parent vPN(i) . Therefore, the superscript Tx means that the distortion is defined for the
transmitting node vi , and the superscript Rx means the receiving node vPN(i) . Define DiInc to be
the mean-square difference between the two estimates y     bSmmse
                                                              i ,i
                                                                     and y   bSmmse
                                                                                i ,PN(i)
                                                                                         . Thus,
                                    1 h                       2
                                                                i
                             DiTx = E ySi − y     bSmmse
                                                      i ,i    2
                                                                   ,                                            (7)
                                    N                               
                               Rx   1                mmse
                                                                   2
                             Di = E ySi − y        bSi ,PN(i)          ,                                        (8)
                                    N                              2
                                                                        
                               Inc  1       mmse             mmse
                                                                       2
                             Di = E y      bSi ,PN(i) − y  bSi ,i          .                                    (9)
                                    N                                  2

                                                           n
                                                                 wi xi at v0 by D0mmse . Because for the same
                                                           P
Denote the MMSE distortion in estimating y =
                                                           i=1
distributed computation scheme, the overall distortion D cannot be less than D0mmse , the overall
distortion with MMSE estimate at the sink v0 ,

                                                 D ≥ D0mmse .                                                 (10)

In Section III-A, we will show that DiInc = DiRx − DiTx (for all feasible distributed computation
schemes) and the overall MMSE distortion D0mmse can be written as the summation of DiInc on
all links. Therefore, we call DiInc the incremental distortion.


         III. M AIN R ESULTS : O UTER B OUNDS BASED ON I NCREMENTAL D ISTORTION

A. Distortion Accumulation

     Our first result shows that the overall MMSE distortion can be written as the summation of
the distortion on all the tree links. It asserts that the distortion for in-network computing must
accumulate along the way from all the leaves to the sink node.

Theorem 1 (Distortion Accumulation). For any feasible distributed computation scheme (see the
model of Section II) and for each node vi ∈ V \ {v0 }, the incremental distortion DiInc and the
MMSE distortions DiTx and DiRx satisfy

                                             DiRx = DiTx + DiInc .                                            (11)

Thus, we also have
                                                        X
                                            DiTx =                   DjInc ,                                  (12)
                                                     vj ∈Si \{vi }


DRAFT                                                                                              February 19, 2018
                                                                                                 11




                                                   n
                                                   X
                                        D0mmse =         DiInc .                              (13)
                                                   i=1

      Proof: See Appendix B-A.



Remark 1. In some of the proofs in this paper, we adopt an ‘induction method in the tree
network’, which we often briefly refer to as induction in the tree. The idea is that, to prove
that some property P holds for each node vi ∈ V, firstly, we prove that P holds at all leaves.
Secondly, we prove that, for an arbitrary node vb , if P holds at vb , then P also holds at its
parent-node va . It is obvious that these two arguments lead to the conclusion that P holds for
all nodes in the tree network.

Remark 2. Note that the distortion accumulation effect does not happen in classical relay
networks that can be understood quite well using deterministic abstractions. However, our result
shows that it is unclear if similar abstractions can be made to obtain insight on in-network
computation. Coming up with such abstractions is a fruitful direction of research in rate-limited
and/or noisy computing.


B. Rate Distortion Outer Bound

   Our second result provides an outer bound on the rate distortion function for linear computation
over a tree network using incremental distortions.

Theorem 2 (Incremental-Distortion-Based Outer Bound). For the model of Section II, given a
feasible distributed computation scheme, the sum rate is lower-bounded by
                           n 
                                   σS2 i       DiTx log2 e
                                                                                
                        1X
                                                              q                
                                                                     Tx   2 Tx
                   R≥          log2 Inc −           −           2Di 4σSi + Di
                        2 i=1      Di          2wi2    2σS2 i
                           n 
                                                                                              (14)
                                         σS2 i
                                                                       
                        1X                                    Tx 1/2
                                                                     
                      =        log2 Rx              − O (Di )           ,
                        2 i=1      Di − DiTx

where wi is the weight of the observation xi , Si is the node set that contains node vi and its
descendants, σS2 i is the variance of each entry of the partial sum ySi =   wj xj , DiTx and DiInc
                                                                          P
                                                                         vj ∈Si
are the MMSE distortion and the incremental distortion at the node vi , which are respectively

February 19, 2018                                                                            DRAFT
12


defined in (7) and (9). By optimizing over the incremental distortions DiInc , one obtains the
following scheme-independent bound stated in an optimization form
                              n 
                                        σS2 i      DiTx log2 e
                                                                                          
                           1X
                                                                      q                 
                                                                             Tx 2    Tx
                  min              log2 Inc −              −             2Di 4σSi + Di      ,
              DiInc ,1≤i≤n 2
                             i=1
                                       Di          2wi2       2σS2 i
                                   
                                      Tx
                                                  P
                                                            DjInc , ∀i 6= 0,                               (15)
                                   Di =
                                   
                                   
                                              vj ∈Si \{vi }
                              s.t.       n
                                             DiInc = D0mmse ≤ D.
                                      P
                                   
                                   
                                         i=1

Define the function ψi (·) as
                                            x     log2 e
                                                            q             
                                ψi (x) =      2
                                                +            2x 4σS2 i + x .                               (16)
                                           2wi     2σS2 i
Then, a lower bound on R can be obtained from the optimization in (15):
                                                 n
                                              σS2 i
                                                 Q
                                                       n
                                     1              1X                                                     (17)
                                  R ≥ log2 i=1 n −        ψi (D),
                                     2    (D/n)     2 i=1
which means that in the limit of small distortion D, the optimization problem (15) provides the
following lower bound in order sense
                                                  n
                                                σS2 i
                                                  Q
                                       1                                                                   (18)
                                    R ≥ log2 i=1 n − nO(D1/2 ).
                                       2    (D/n)
     Proof Sketch: The complete proof is in Appendix B-B. The first step is to prove, on an arbitrary
link vb → va towards the root (see Fig. 1), N Rb→a ≥ h(b mmse
                                                       yS,b   ) − N2 log2 2πeDbInc , where h(·)
denotes differential entropy, and hence the rate Rb→a is related to the incremental distortion DbInc .
                                                              
  Then, we prove that h(b    mmse
                           yS,b   ) > h(yS ) − O N (DbTx )1/2 , using inequality (2). Thus, using
                                                                                                         σ2
h(yS ) = N2 log 2πeσS2 b (note that S and Sb here denote the same set), we get Rb→a ≥ 12 log2 DSIncb −
                                                                                                b
       Tx 1/2
              
O (Db )         . Inequality (14) can be obtained by summing over all links towards the root. The
optimization form obtained in (15) only requires the minimization of the scheme-dependent
bound over the choices of DiInc . The proof of the last inequality (17) and its order-sense form
(18) can be obtained by lower-bounding the optimization problem (15).
     This outer bound is obtained when all incremental distortions are equal, which is very similar
to the reverse water-filling solution for the parallel Gaussian lossy source coding problem [15,
Theorem 10.3.3] in the limit of large rate (zero distortion). We will prove that this rate (in the
small distortion regime) is also achievable using Gaussian random codebooks (see Section IV).

DRAFT                                                                                           February 19, 2018
                                                                                                       13


To achieve the optimal sum rate, the rate on the link vi → vPN(i) should be approximately equal
             σ2
to 12 log2 D/n
            Si
               , where σS2 i is the variance of each entry of the partial sum ySi .


C. Comparison With the Cut-Set Bound

   Using the classical cut-set bound technique [11, Thm. 1], we can obtain another bound different
from the one in Theorem 2. This bound is in the same mathematical form as the sum rate
expression in [10, Sec. V-A.3].

Theorem 3 (Cut-Set Outer Bound). For the model of Section II, the sum rate is lower-bounded
by
                                                    n
                                               1X        σ2
                                            R≥       log2 SRxi .                                    (19)
                                               2 i=1     Di
      Proof: See Appendix B-C.
   Denote by R1 the outer bound obtained by the classical cut-set bound (Theorem 3) and by
R2 the outer bound obtained by Theorem 2. From (14) and (19)
                                     n 
                                                DiRx
                                                                      
                                  1X                         Tx 1/2
                                                                    
                 ∆R := R2 − R1 =         log2 Rx       − O (Di )        .                           (20)
                                  2 i=1      Di − DiTx
In order to illustrate the improvement on the outer bound R2 , we consider the case when T =
(V, E) is a line network, connected as v0 ↔ v1 ↔ . . . ↔ vn . Then,
                                      (a)            (b)
                            bSmmse
                            y  i−1 ,i−1
                                         bSmmse
                                        =y  i−1 ,PN(i)
                                                        bSmmse
                                                       =y  i ,PN(i)
                                                                    + wi−1 xi−1 ,                   (21)

where (a) holds because vi−1 is the parent-node of vi , and (b) follows from ySi−1 = ySi +
                               bSmmse
wi−1 xi−1 . Therefore, ySi−1 − y  i−1 ,i−1
                                                    bSmmse
                                           = y Si − y  i ,PN(i)
                                                                                             Tx
                                                                . Using (7), (8), we obtain Di−1 = DiRx .
Thus, (20) changes to
                                 n          Tx
                                                                  
                              1X           Di−1           Tx 1/2
                                                                 
                         ∆R =       log2 Tx         − O (Di )       ,                               (22)
                              2 i=1     Di−1 − DiTx
where 0 = DnTx < Dn−1
                  Tx
                      < . . . < D1Tx < D0mmse ≤ D.
   Then, we consider a typical choice of DiTx , which minimizes the rate outer bound. In (18), we
can show that, when D is required to be small enough, the way to minimize the RHS of (14) is
to make DiRx −DiTx to be a constant for all i. This strategy yields a lower bound on the minimum
possible rate. In the case of a line network, this strategy becomes DiTx = n−i
                                                                             n
                                                                                D0mmse , ∀i. Then
                     n                                    
                   X     log2 (n − i + 1)         Tx 1/2
                                                             1
            ∆R =                          − O (Di )          ≈ log2 (n!) = Θ(n log2 n),        (23)
                    i=1
                                 2                            2

February 19, 2018                                                                                  DRAFT
14


when the overall distortion D is small, i.e., the gap between the two bounds can be arbitrarily
large.

Remark 3. Here, we point out the intuition underlying the difference between the proofs of
the incremental-distortion-based bound (Theorem 2) and the cut-set bound (Theorem 3). The
classical proofs of cut-set bounds for lossy computation often rely on the following key steps
(see Appendix B-C, as well as the proofs of [30, Theorem III.1]) and [11, Proposition 4]):
                      Rate ≥ I (Computed Result; True Result)
                                                                                             (24)
                       ≥ h(True Result) − h(True Result|Computed Result),
where h(True Result|Computed Result) can be upper-bounded by a function of overall distor-
tion and the expression h(True Result) can be obtained explicitly. However, the proof of the
incremental-distortion-based bound is based on the following key steps (see Appendix B-B):
                Rate on Link e = (v1 , v2 )

              ≥ I (Computed Result 1; Computed Result 2)                                     (25)

              ≥ h(Computed Result 1) − h(Computed Result 1|Computed Result 2),
where “Computed Result 1” denotes the MMSE estimate at the parent-node v1 on link e =
(v1 , v2 ) and “Computed Result 2” denotes the MMSE estimate at the child-node v2 on link e.
The term h(Computed Result 1|Computed Result 2) leads to a function of incremental distortion
between two estimates, which yields a tighter bound than cut-set bounds for lossy in-network
computing. However, the distribution of “Computed Result 1”, the MMSE estimate, is unknown,
and hence h(Computed Result 1) cannot be obtained directly. To solve this problem, we lower-
bound h(Computed Result 1) by upper-bounding the difference between h(Computed Result 1)
and h(True Result), using the inequality in Lemma 2.

               IV. ACHIEVABLE R ATES WITH R ANDOM G AUSSIAN C ODEBOOKS

     In this section, we use random Gaussian codebooks to give an incremental-distortion based
sum rate inner bound. The main achievable result in this paper is as follows.

Theorem 4 (Inner Bound). Using random Gaussian codebooks, we can find a distributed com-
putation scheme, such that the sum rate R is upper-bounded by
                                          n
                                       1X        σ2
                                  R≤         log2 Si + nδN ,                                 (26)
                                       2 i=1      di

DRAFT                                                                             February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                                   15


where limN →∞ δN = 0 is a parameter defined in (39), and di ’s are tunable distortion parameters,
and σS2 =
          P 2
             wj . Further, the overall distortion D satisfies
              vj ∈S

                                                             n
                                                             X
                                                     D≤            di + N ,                                                  (27)
                                                             i=1

where limN →∞ N = 0 is a parameter defined in (55)4 . The limit sum rate limN →∞ R exists,
and can be upper-bounded by
                                                                        n
                                                                 σS2 i
                                                                        Q
                                                        1
                                                 lim R ≤ log2 i=1 n .                                                         (28)
                                                N →∞    2    (D/n)
        Proof: See Section IV-B.
      We rely on typicality-based arguments to prove the inner bound. Therefore, before we elaborate
on the main distributed computation scheme in Section IV-B, we first review some notation and
techniques on typicality.


A. Notation on Typicality-Based Coding

      We first define some random variables, the pdfs of which we will use in the distributed
computation scheme. (We will clarify the absolute continuity and hence existence of densities
with respect to the appropriate Lebesgue measure of the various random objects used in our
proofs.) At each node vi , we define an estimate random variable UiTC and a description random
variable ViTC . The superscript TC represents the Gaussian test channel, which we will use to
                                                                     bi2 . The estimate random
define these scalar random variables. Denote the variance of UiTC by σ
variables UiTC ’s are defined from the leaves to the root v0 in the tree. For an arbitrary leaf vl ,
define
                                                         UlTC = wl Xl ,                                                       (29)

where Xl ∼ N (0, 1) is a scalar random variable, and wl is the weight at node vl in the weighted
         n
         P
sum y =    wi xi . For non-leaf nodes, without loss of generality, we use v1 , v2 , . . . vd to denote
             i=1
the children of an arbitrary node vb (see Fig. 1). Suppose the description random variables

  4
   The parameter δN is used for providing a slight excess rate of the rate defined by mutual information in (39), and the parameter
                                                                                                                             Pn
N upper-bounds the deviation of the overall sum distortion D from the summation of the tunable distortion parameters           di .
                                                                                                                             i=1
Note that here N denotes the code length of the random Gaussian codebooks.


February 19, 2018                                                                                                           DRAFT
16


{ViTC }di=1 at the children of node vb have been defined (the formal definitions of the description
random variables are provided later in equation (31)). Then, define the estimate random variable
for the non-leaf node vb as
                                                 d
                                                 X
                                        UbTC =         VkTC + wb Xb ,                              (30)
                                                 k=1

where Xb ∼ N (0, 1) is a scalar random variable, and wb is the weight at vb . At each node vi , the
description random variable ViTC is now defined based on the estimate random variable using a
Gaussian test channel
                                            UiTC = ViTC + Zi ,                                     (31)

where Zi ∼ N (0, di ) is independent of ViTC and di is a variable that will be chosen later. From the
                                                   bi2 − di . Readers are referred to Appendix C-A
definition of Gaussian test channels, var[ViTC ] = σ
for details on the definition of Gaussian test channels. Then, using (31), we have that
                                 d
                                 X                          d
                                                            X
                         bb2 =
                         σ             var[ViTC ] + wb2 =          σk2 − dk ) + wb2 .
                                                                  (b                               (32)
                                 k=1                        k=1

Note that the estimate random variables and the description random variables are both defined
from leaves to the root. However, we have different definitions of the estimate random variables
for leaves and non-leaf nodes ((29) and (30)) but the same definition of description random
variables. Note that the Gaussian test channel (31) and the definitions in (29) and (30) involve
linear transformations. Therefore, all estimate random variables UiTC ’s and description random
variables ViTC ’s are scalar Gaussian random variables with zero mean. We will not directly use
the random variables UiTC and ViTC in the achievability proof (because they are scalars and cannot
be directly used for coding). However, we use the pdfs of these random variables. We use φUiTC
and φViTC to denote the pdfs of UiTC and ViTC . We also use joint pdfs, where the meanings
are always clear from the context. Note that the variance of UiTC and ViTC are tunable, since
the parameter di , which is related to the variance of the added Gaussian noise Zi , is a tuning
parameter.

Remark 4. In fact, the way in which we define the description random variables and estimate
random variables in Section IV-A essentially implies the basic idea of our distributed computa-
tion scheme. Although we consider block computation in the entire paper, we can view these
description random variables and estimate random variables as the ‘typical’ intermediate results

DRAFT                                                                                   February 19, 2018
                                                                                                   17


during the computation. In particular, the estimate random variable UiTC represents the typical
properties of the estimate bsi of the partial sum ySi at the node vi (by representing the typical
properties, we mean the typical sets that the estimate bsi belongs to are defined based on the
distributions of the estimate random variable UiTC ), while the description random variable ViTC
                                                      ri . Note that the messages to be further
represents the typical properties of the descriptions b
                                                                            ri . The estimate U0TC
transmitted from the node vi to its parent node is the description sequence b
represents the properties of the estimate of Y at the sink v0 . Based on this intuition, we can
provide an intuitive explanation of the formula in Theorem 4: suppose UiTC and ViTC are length-
N vectors (this is of course technically incorrect, and we only try to provide some intuition on
Theorem 4 here), then, since UiTC and ViTC are all Gaussian, it can be proved that ViTC is just
                                                          
the MMSE estimate y bSmmse
                       i ,PN(i)
                                = E ySi |IPN(i) = E ySi |ViTC of the required partial sum ySi at
node vPN(i) , the parent node of vi . Then, we can apply the distortion accumulation result ((13)
                                                     n
in Theorem 1) to UiTC and ViTC , and obtain D =        di , since di = E[(UiTC )2 − (ViTC )2 ] is the
                                                    P
                                                      i=1
counterpart of the incremental distortion DiInc . In Section IV-B, we will formalize this intuitive
argument using Gaussian random codes.

   Denote by qU , qV and qU,V the N -fold product distribution of the scalar distributions φUiTC ,
                                    N        N
φViTC and φUiTC ,ViTC . Denote by TU,ε and TV,ε the two sets of N -length sequences sN and rN that
                                                                    2N
are respectively typical with respect to φTC     TC
                                          U and φV . Denote by Jε        the set of all 2N -length
                   
sequences sN , rN that are jointly typical with respect to φU TC ,V TC . Denote by TV,ε N
                                                                                          (sN ) the
set of sequences rN that are jointly typical with a particular typical sequence sN . The formal
definitions of these typical sets are provided in the following equations (note that we will use
a general definition of typical sets from [38], and we will show that the definitions below are
special cases of the general definition):
                                                                       
             N        N      1          N TC        1 N 2         2
           TU,ε = s : − log qU (s ) − h(Ui ) < εN ,   ||s ||2 − σ̂i < εN ,                      (33)
                            N                       N

                                                                                  
         N            N   1         N        TC        1 N 2          2
       TV,ε =        r : − log qV (r ) − h(Vi ) < εN ,   ||r ||2 − (σ̂i − di ) < εN ,           (34)
                          N                            N
             
                                                    1
   J2N =                         N
              (sN , rN ) : sN ∈ TU,ε          N
                                     , rN ∈ TV,ε , − log qU,V (sN , rN ) − h(UiTC , ViTC ) < εN ,
                                                    N
                                                                                               (35)
                                                                 1 N         N 2
                                                                    ||s − r ||2 − di < εN ,
                                                                 N

February 19, 2018                                                                              DRAFT
18




                                             N
                                                (sN ) = rN : (sN , rN ) ∈ J2N .
                                                       
                                           TV,ε                                                                                (36)


B. Applying Gaussian Codes in Function Computing

         The illustrative explanation in Remark 4 relies on Gaussian test channels, which is a heuristic
to provide insights into the design of the achievability strategy. In this part, we rigorously prove
the achievability using explicit random Gaussian codebooks.
         Note that all computations are block computations. According to the system model, each node
vi has a random vector xi , where each coordinate is generated by N (0, 1). The sink v0 has the
                                        n
                                                                      wj xj and σS2 =
                                        P                          P                    P 2
goal to compute the weighted sum y =      wi xi . Recall that yS =                         wj .
                                                         i=1                                vj ∈S                      vj ∈S
                                                                                                    5
         Before the computation starts, each node vi generates a codebook Ci = {ci (w) :                                   w ∈
{0, 1, . . . 2N Ri }}, where each codeword is generated i.i.d. according to distribution pViTC . The
rate is chosen such that
                                                                             1    b2
                                                                                  σ
                                        Ri = I(UiTC ; ViTC ) + δN =            log i + δN ,                                    (37)
                                                                             2    di
where UiTC and ViTC are scalar test-channel random variables defined in Section IV-A and
 lim δN = 0. We claim that, for each node vi ∈ V,
N →∞


                                                             bi2 ≤ σS2 i .
                                                             σ                                                                 (38)

            Proof: See Appendix C-B.
         This leads to
                                                         1    σS2 i
                                                     Ri ≤ log       + δN .                                                     (39)
                                                         2    di
Summing up (39) over all links, we obtain the first inequality (26) in Theorem 4.
         The codebook Ci is revealed to vi ’s parent-node vPN(i) . At the beginning of the distributed
computation scheme, each leaf vl uses wl xl as the estimate bsl . During the distributed compu-
tation scheme, as shown in Fig. 1, each non-leaf node vb , upon receiving description indices

     5
         Notice that the rate of this code should be log2 (2N Ri + 1) ≈ Ri . However, when N → ∞ (which is the case considered in
this section), the code rate converges to Ri . In other words, a single codeword ci (0) has asymptotically no effect on the coding
rate.


DRAFT                                                                                                            February 19, 2018
                                                                                                       19


M1b , M2b , . . . Mdb from the d children v1 , . . . vd , decodes these description indices, computes the
sum of these descriptions and the data vector generated at vb as follows
                                              d
                                              X
                                      bsb =         ck (Mk→b ) + wb xb ,                            (40)
                                              k=1

and re-encodes bsb into a new description index Mb→a ∈ [1 : 2N Rb ] and sends the description index
                                                                                 rb = cb (Mb→a ).
to the parent-node va using rate Rb . We denote the reconstructed description by b
The decoding and encoding at the node vb are defined as follows. Note that the leaves only
encode and the root v0 only decodes.

   •   Decoding: In each codebook Ck , k = 1, . . . d, use the codeword ck (Mk→b ) as the description
       rk . If vb = v0 is the root, it computes the sum of all codewords ck (Mk→0 ) as the estimate
       b
       of y:
                                           X                           X
                                   b=
                                   y                  ck (Mk→0 ) =                 rk .
                                                                                   b                (41)
                                        vk ∈N (v0 )                  vk ∈N (v0 )

   •   Encoding: Find a codeword cb (Mb→a ) ∈ Cb \ {cb (0)} such that the two vectors bsb =
       Pd
                                 rb = cb (Mb→a ) are jointly typical with respect to the test-
          ck (Mk→b ) + wb xb and b
       k=1
       channel distribution φUbTC ,VbTC (in J2N ). If there are more than one codewords that satisfy
                                                                              d
                                                                              P
       this condition, arbitrarily choose one of them. However, if bsb =         ck (Mk→b ) + wb xb is
                                                                                          k=1
                                                                                 N
       not typical with respect to the test-channel distribution φUbTC (not in TU,ε ), or if there is no
       codeword in Cb \ {cb (0)} that satisfies the joint typicality condition, send description index
       Mb→a = 0 (note that this means the index of the 0-th random codeword cb (0), instead of a
       vector 0N ).

   Since all codebooks Ck , k = 1, . . . d, have been revealed to vb , the decoding is always
successful, in that the decoding process is simply the mapping from the description index Mk→b
to the description ck (Mk→b ). However, the encoding may fail. In this case, the description index
Mb→a = 0 is sent and this description index is decoded to a predetermined random sequence
cb (0) on the receiver side. Note that the rate Ri is the same as Ri→PN(i) in (3), and the notation
Ri is used here for simplicity. We still use the notation Ri→PN(i) for the results on network
consensus, where each node may have to send descriptions to different nodes, and Ri→PN(i) can
usefully indicate that the direction of information transmission is from the node vi to its parent
node vPN(i) .

February 19, 2018                                                                                  DRAFT
20


C. The Proof of Theorem 4: Analysis of the Gaussian Random Codes

     In this part, we analyze the expected distortion of the Gaussian random codes. Note that,
unless specifically clarified, all results in this part are stated for the random coding ensemble,
i.e., the expectation E[·] and the probability Pr(·) are taken over random data sampling, codeword
selection and random codebook generation. The result in Theorem 4 holds for at least one code
in this random coding ensemble.
                                                                            rb are jointly typical
     The following Lemma 3 states that the estimate bsb and the description b
for all b with high probability.

Lemma 3 (Covering Lemma for Lossy In-network Linear Function Computing). For the encoding
and decoding schemes as described in this section, denote by Ei = 1 the event that the encoding
at the node vi is not successful. Then

                                     lim sup Pr(Ei = 1) = 0,                                      (42)
                                     N →∞ 1≤i≤n

where the probability is taken over random data sampling and random codebook generation.

       Proof: See Appendix C-C.
                                                               rb . Note that the inequalities in
     In Lemma 4, we provide bounds on the variances of bsb and b
                                                               rb because the typicality of bsb only
Lemma 4 do not trivially follow from the typicality of bsb and b
ensures that N1 kbsb k22 − σ
                           bb2 converges to zero in probability, while (43) requires convergence in
mean value to zero. This is a standard issue. In Appendix C-D, we use a standard technique to
overcome this issue. The key idea is that, for non-typical case (when encoding fails), we send
a predetermined random sequence, on the variance of which we can provide a bound.

                                           rb = cb (Mb→a ) and the estimate bsb defined in (40)
Lemma 4. At each node vb , the description b
satisfy                                            
                                          1       2
                                        E             bb2 < εN ,
                                            kbsb k2 − σ                                           (43)
                                          N

                                             
                                     1      2
                                   E   kb        σb2 − db ) < εN ,
                                        rb k2 − (b                                                (44)
                                     N

                                                    
                                      1            2
                                    E    rb − bsb k2 − db < εN ,
                                        kb                                                        (45)
                                      N
where limN →∞ εN = 0.

DRAFT                                                                                  February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                                   21


         Proof: See Appendix C-D.

                                           rb = cb (Mb→a ) and the estimate bsb defined in (40)
Lemma 5. At each node vb , the description b
satisfy
                                                           N
                                               h(bsb ) >             σb2 − N βN ,
                                                             log2 2πeb                                                          (46)
                                                           2

                                                      N
                                          h(b
                                            rb ) >               σb2 − db ) − N βN ,
                                                        log2 2πe(b                                                              (47)
                                                      2
where limN →∞ βN = 0, h(·) is the differential entropy function, and the random vectors bsb and
rb are defined in the probability space that contains the random codebook generation6 .
b

         Proof: See Appendix C-E.
                                     rb are close to Gaussian-distributed random variables in
      Lemma 5 indicates that bsb and b
differential entropy sense. We will use Lemma 4 and Lemma 5 to show a non-trivial relationship
between the Gaussian-code-based distortion di and the MMSE-based incremental distortion DiInc .
This relationship is characterized in Lemma 6. The proof is based on an observation that, when
the true distribution of the source is close (in the sense of differential entropy) to the expected
distribution, the estimate based on random coding can provide a distortion that is approximately
equal to the MMSE estimate.

Remark 5. If we try to directly obtain the overall distortion bound in (27) using some classical
coding schemes such as Wyner-Ziv coding [15, Chapter 15.9], we have to prove that the incre-
mental errors (the term di ) due to successive quantizations along the network are ‘approximately
uncorrelated’ (so that di for different i can be summed up to obtain the bound on the overall
distortion (27)). While we do not pursue this direction, the above may be achieved by obtaining
a non-trivial generalization of the “Markov Lemma” [32, Lecture Notes 13] to Gaussian sources.
To bypass this difficulty, we directly relate the Gaussian-code-based distortion di and the MMSE-
based distortion DiTx , which simultaneously shows some nontrivial connections between Gaussian

  6
                                                                       rb , we need to first define the densities (with respect to the
                                                                sb and b
      To define differential entropy for the two random vectors b
                                                          sb is certainly absolutely continuous, because it is smoothed by the
Lebesgue measure) of the two random vectors. The estimate b
Gaussian random variable xb (see (40)). However, conditioned on a specific instance of the Gaussian codebooks, the random
                                                                              rb is −∞. To overcome this difficulty, we cast the
       rb has a finite support, and the (conditional) differential entropy of b
vector b
                                                                                                                          rb is also
                                              rb , i.e., taking into account the code generation randomness. In this way, b
analysis on the unconditional distribution of b
absolutely continuous.


February 19, 2018                                                                                                             DRAFT
22


random codes and MMSE estimates. This is why the proof of the inner bound is conceptually
different from existing literature.

                                                                               bSmmse
     Recall that the MMSE estimate of the sum ySi at the node vj is denoted by y  i ,j
                                                                                       = ECi [ySi |Ij ],
                                                                                      Tx     Rx           Inc
where Ij , as before, denotes the information available to the node vj . Define    Di , Di and Di 
                                                 h
                                                                    2
                                                                      i                                   2
similar to (7), (8) and (9). That is, DiTx = E N1 ySi − y   bSmmse
                                                               i ,i 2
                                                                       , D Rx
                                                                           i  = E  1
                                                                                   N
                                                                                     y S i
                                                                                           − y
                                                                                             b mmse
                                                                                               S i ,PN(i)
                                                                                                        2
                                            2
and DiInc = N1 E y     bSmmse
                          i ,PN(i)
                                    bSmmse
                                   −y  i ,i
                                               . Notice that the inner E[·] (for the MMSE estimate
                                           2
bSmmse
y  i ,j
          = ECi [ySi |Ij ]) is for a given codebook Ci at vi , because both vi and its parent vPN(i)
know the codebook Ci (see the codebook construction in Section IV-B). However, the outer E[·]
             h                   i
                               2
(for DiTx = E N1 ySi − y
                       bSmmse
                          i ,i 2
                                   ) is still taken over both the codeword selection and the random
codebook generation. In this subsection, the quantities DiTx , DiRx and DiInc are all averaged over
the random codebook ensemble.

Lemma 6. For an arbitrary node vi
                            p              q       p
                             di − εN − ηN ≤ DiInc ≤ di + εN + ηN ,                                       (48)

where lim ηN = 0 and εN is the same as in (45). Further, the mean-square difference between
          N →∞
                  bSmmse
the MMSE estimate y  i ,i
                          and the estimate bsi based on Gaussian random codes satisfies

                                      1 h               2
                                                          i
                                                bSmmse
                                        E bsi − y  i ,i 2
                                                            ≤ ∆N ,                                       (49)
                                      N

where lim ∆N = 0.
          N →∞

       Proof: See Appendix C-F.
     Since the distributed computation scheme using Gaussian random codes in Theorem 4 (see
Section IV-B) satisfies the model in Section II, the distortion accumulation result in Theorem 1
holds, i.e.,
                                                        n
                                    1 h           2
                                                    i X
                                          bSmmse
                                      E y−y  0 ,0 2
                                                     =     DiInc ,                                       (50)
                                    N                  i=1

                                     bS0 ,0 is the MMSE estimate of y at the sink v0 , and all
where y is the overall weighted sum, y
expectation operations are taken over the random codebook ensemble. Using (49) in Lemma 6,
we have that
                                      1 h           2
                                                      i
                                            bSmmse
                                          b−y
                                        E y    0 ,0 2
                                                        ≤ ∆N ,                                           (51)
                                      N

DRAFT                                                                                         February 19, 2018
                                                                                               23


                         b is the estimate of the overall sum y at the sink using random
where limN →∞ ∆N = 0 and y
Gaussian code. From Lemma 1, we have that
                                 h                i     h              i
                                                2               mmse 2
                     y − yk22 = E y − y bSmmse
                            
                  E kb                     0 ,0 2
                                                    + E   y
                                                          b − y
                                                              b S0 ,0 2 .                    (52)

Plugging in (50), (51) and using the triangle inequality, we get
                                                 n
                                  1        2
                                                X
                                      y − yk2 ≤
                               D = E kb             DiInc + ∆N .                             (53)
                                  N             i=1

Using (48) in Lemma 6, we get
                                n p
                                X                  2
                             D≤     d i + εN + η N
                                    i=1
                                     n           n
                                                                                             (54)
                                    X            X                   p
                                                              2
                                =         di +         εN + η N + 2ηN di + εN .
                                    i=1          i=1
                    n
                    P            2
                                        √
By defining N =          εN + η N + 2ηN di + εN , we get
                    i=1
                                                       n
                                                       X
                                                 D≤           di + N ,                      (55)
                                                        i=1

where limN →∞ N = 0. Finally, noticing that (55) holds for the random code ensemble, we can
find at least one code in the ensemble such that the distortion bound (27) holds.
   Since we can tune the distortion parameter di directly, we can set d1 = d2 = . . . = dn = d.
Then, in the limit of large N , D = nd, which means that d1 = d2 = . . . = dn = D/n. Thus, we
                                                                       n
                                                           2
                                                                       Q
                                                          σS
                                               1      i=1    i
can obtain the minimized achievable result R = 2 log2 (D/n)n , which is (28) in Theorem 4.

                             V. E XTENSION TO N ETWORK C ONSENSUS

  The results in the preceding sections can be extended to the case when each node in the
                                                 Pn
network T wants to obtain an estimate of y =        wi xi . Note that the network consensus
                                                                 i=1
problem considered in this paper is a generalization of average consensus, which is the case
where wi = n1 , ∀i. The generalized definition in this paper is similar with the general form of
distributed averaging in [17], [30].
   Define Si→j ⊂ V as the set that contains node vi and all its descendants when neighboring
node vj is defined to be the parent-node of vi . As in (7)-(9), define
                                                                  
                                Tx     1                 mmse
                                                                 2
                              Di→j = E ySi→j − y        bSi→j ,i     ,                       (56)
                                       N                         2


February 19, 2018                                                                         DRAFT
24



                                                                               
                                 Rx       1                                 2
                                Di→j =      E                bSmmse
                                                     ySi→j − y  i→j ,j
                                                                                    ,              (57)
                                          N                                 2

and                                                                            
                                 Inc     1                                  2
                                Di→j =     E         bSmmse
                                                     y  i→j ,i
                                                                bSmmse
                                                               −y  i→j ,j
                                                                                    ,              (58)
                                         N                                  2

      bSmmse
where y  i→j ,i
                    bSmmse
                and y  i→j ,j
                              are defined by (6), i.e., the MMSE estimates of ySi→j with information
at vi or at vj . Since each node vi makes an estimate of the weighted sum y, for a given distributed
                                                                          bimmse of y at the
computation scheme, we define the overall distortion of the MMSE estimate y
node vi as
                                              1  mmse
                                   Dimmse =            − yk22 .
                                                             
                                                E kb
                                                   yi                                              (59)
                                              N
For the same distributed computation scheme, define the overall distortion of the estimate y
                                                                                           bi of
y at the node vi as
                                                 1 
                                     DiTotal =        yi − yk22 .
                                                               
                                                   E kb                                            (60)
                                                 N
Then, we have that DiTotal ≥ Dimmse . For a feasible and oblivious distributed computation scheme
(T, S , G , v, e) ∈ F (see the distributed computation model in Section II), the sum rate R is
defined in the same way as in the problem of linear function computation:
                                              n
                                              X X
                                        R=                      Ri→j .                             (61)
                                               i=1 vj ∈N (i)

The distortion is defined as the sum distortion
                                                     n
                                                     X
                                           D=              DiTotal .                               (62)
                                                     i=1

Thus, the problem to be considered is

                                                 min              R,
                                          (T,S ,G ,v,e)∈F
                                                                                                   (63)
                                                                 tar
                                                 s.t. D ≤ D .
               −
               →                                                                      −
                                                                                      →
     We define T k as the edge set of the directed tree towards the root vk . The set T k can be
written as
                     −
                     →
                     T k = {directed edges (vi , vj ) : (vi , vj ) ∈ E, and vj

                      is the parent node of vi when vk is defined as the root}.

DRAFT                                                                                   February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                         25


In all, we define n different directed edge sets of directed trees towards n different roots. These
directed trees are all defined based on the original tree T . The only difference is that the edges
                                −
                                →
are directed. We use (i, j) ∈ T k to represent that the ordered pair (i, j) is a directed edge in
                       −
                       →
the directed edge set T k .

Theorem 5 (Distortion Accumulation for Network Consensus). For the network consensus prob-
lem, the overall distortion of estimating Y at the node vk satisfies

                                                               X
                                                  Dkmmse =                 Inc
                                                                          Di→j ,                                      (64)
                                                                   →
                                                                   −
                                                             (i,j)∈ T k


      −
      →                                                                            Inc
where T k is the directed edge set of the directed tree towards the root vk , and Di→j is as defined
in (58).

      Proof: See Appendix D-A.



A. Inner and Outer Bounds Based on Incremental-Distortion

   Recall that σS2 is the variance of YS . The counterpart of Theorem 2 is stated as follows.

Theorem 6 (Incremental-Distortion-Based Outer Bound for Network Consensus). For the network
consensus problem, given a feasible distributed computation scheme, the sum rate is lower-
bounded by

                    n
                    X X
              R=                     Ri→j
                    i=1 vj ∈N (i)
                    n
                                     "                                                                          #
                                             σS2 i→j Tx
                                                                             r
                 1X X                               Di→j   log e                                           
               ≥                         log2 Inc −    2
                                                         − 22                        Tx
                                                                                   2Di→j 4σS2 i→j + Di→j
                                                                                                     Tx
                                                                                                                      (65)
                 2 i=1                       Di→j   2wi   2σSi→j
                         vj ∈N (i)
                    n
                                     "                                      #
                 1X X                             σS2 i→j           Tx 1/2
                                                                           
               =                      log2    Rx     Tx
                                                              − O (Di→j )     ,
                 2 i=1                       Di→j − Di→j
                        vj ∈N (i)


where σS2 i→j is the variance of each entry of the partial sum ySi→j =                                                Tx
                                                                                                P
                                                                                                         wk xk , and Di→j ,
                                                                                              vk ∈Si→j
 Rx       Inc
Di→j and Di→j are respectively defined in (56), (57) and (58). By optimizing over the incremental
             Inc
distortions Di→j , one obtains the following scheme-independent bound stated in an optimization

February 19, 2018                                                                                                    DRAFT
26


form
                        n
                                     "                                                          #
                                          σS2 i→j  Tx
                                                                    r
                     1X X                         Di→j     log2 e                            
          min                         log2 Inc −     2
                                                       − 2               Tx
                                                                      2Di→j   4σS2 i→j + Di→j
                                                                                          Tx
                                                                                                  ,
       Inc ,∀(i,j)∈E 2
      Di→j                                D       2w      2σ
                       i=1 vj ∈N (i)         i→j     i        S i→j

                         
                               Tx                       Inc                                             (66)
                                                P
                         Di→j =
                         
                                                      Dk→l  , ∀(i, j) ∈ E,
                                   vk ∈Si→j \{vi },(k,l)∈T~j
                   s.t.
                                  D ≥ Dkmmse =                         Inc
                                                            P
                          
                                                                     Di→j .
                                                               →
                                                               −
                          
                                                         (i,j)∈ T k

       Proof: See Appendix D-B.
     Then, we present an achievable result using Gaussian codes to show that the outer bound in
Theorem 6 is tight in the low distortion regime.

Theorem 7 (Inner Bound for Network Consensus). Using Gaussian random codebooks, we can
find a distributed computation scheme, such that the sum rate R satisfies
                                       n
                                    1X X      σS2
                              R≤          log2 i→j + (2n − 2)δN ,                                       (67)
                                    2 i=1     di→j
                                             vj ∈N (i)

where limN →∞ δN = 0, and the di→j ’s are distortion parameters. Further, the overall distortion
D in all nodes vi satisfies
                                              n
                                              X X
                                       D<                           di→j + nN ,                        (68)
                                                         →
                                               k=1 (i,j)∈−
                                                         T      k


where limN →∞ N = 0.

       Proof: See Appendix D-C.
     If we ignore the small gap between the inner bound (67) and the outer bound (65) when the
resolution level D is fine enough, the optimal rate can be obtained by solving the following
convex optimization problem:
                                                     n
                                                  1X X      σS2 i→j
                                       min              log2 Inc ,
                                    Inc ,∀(i,j)∈E 2
                                   Di→j                     Di→j
                                                    i=1      vj ∈N (i)
                                            n                                                           (69)
                                            X       X
                                                                 Inc
                                   s.t.                         Di→j ≤ D.
                                                      →
                                            k=1 (i,j)∈−
                                                      T     k


Remark 6. The rate distortion outer bound in (65) depends on the distributed computation scheme.
                                                                                        Inc
Using convex optimization techniques, we can minimize over all incremental distortions Di→j
with the linear constrains specified by (64) to obtain a fundamental outer bound on the rate
distortion function of distributed consensus. The outer bound is essentially obtained by rate

DRAFT                                                                                        February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                               27


allocation in the network. If the O(D1/2 ) gap between the inner and outer bound is neglected,
                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                      σS
the rate (measured in number of bits) allocated to the link vi → vj is 12 log2 DInc
                                                                                i→j
                                                                                    .
                                                                                                        i→j

      We consider a special case when wi = n1 , ∀i. This is the classical case of lossy distributed
network consensus with the same distortion requirement at all nodes [11]. We again consider the
line network as shown in Section III-C. In this case, it can be shown that the optimal solution is

                                             Inc           D
                                            Di→j =               , ∀(i, j) ∈ E,
                                                        2(n − 1)
           Tx 1/2
                  
if all O (Di→j )    terms are neglected, in the limit of zero-distortion (high resolution)7 . Similar
with the data-aggregation case, this solution for network consensus is also very similar to the
reverse water-filling solution for parallel Gaussian lossy source coding problem [15, Theorem
10.3.3] in the limit of large rate (zero distortion). This solution yields a sum rate of O nlog2 D1 .
                                                                                                   

The classical outer bound [11, Prop. 4] about the distributed network consensus in a tree network
              1
                  
is O nlog2 n3/2 D
                   . This means that our result is certainly tighter than the classical result in a
line network in the zero-distortion limit. Moreover, this O(n log n) gap is also consistent with
the log(n!) gap in Section III-C.


                                                   VI. C ONCLUSIONS

      In this paper, we have considered the lossy linear function computation problem in a Gaussian
tree network. Our results show that the phenomenon of information dissipation exists in this
problem, and by quantifying the information dissipation, we obtain an information-theoretic
outer bound on the rate distortion function that is tighter than classical cut-set bounds for lossy
linear function computing for both data aggregation and network consensus problems. The results
                                                             √
also show that linear Gaussian codes can achieve within O( D) of the obtained outer bound,
which means that our outer bound is tight when the required distortion is small (high resolution
scenario). A meaningful future work is to investigate tighter outer bound for all values of D,
and investigate compression algorithms, e.g., lattice codes [18], [39], that achieve the outer
bound for all values of D. Another research topic of interest is the study of deterministic
abstractions that account for the distortion accumulation effect. Since our work focuses on a
special case of noiseless networks, it may prove useful in initiating this direction of research. It

                                    
  7                          Tx
      We can neglect the O (Di→j )1/2 terms, because in the zero-distortion limit, log DInc
                                                                                         1
                                                                                               > log DTx1         Tx
                                                                                                             >> (Di→j )1/2 .
                                                                                         i→j           i→j




February 19, 2018                                                                                                        DRAFT
28


is also interesting to investigate the generalization of the distortion accumulation effect and the
inequalities developed in this paper to other computation and inference problems in networks,
especially in networks with cycles and in the case when data is not stored at all nodes [17],
[40]. One can obtain loose upper bounds for simple non-tree networks. For instance, for an
achievable distortion bound in non-tree networks, a simple extension could be to the case of
a directed acyclic network with only one source node with message x, and only two paths to
the sink node. In this case, if the mean-square error on one path is D1 and the mean-square
error on the other path is D2 , an achievable (if suboptimal) variance of estimating the source
message using these two messages is min{D1 , D2 }. This is achieved by either choosing the
first message or the second message, and the equality is achieved when the two messages are
the same. Therefore, one can obtain (loose) upper bounds on the accumulation of distortion
using our achievability results. However, because of obvious looseness in the bound, we may
not achieve an asymptotically tight result, as we obtained in Theorem 1. Another interesting
direction is the possible extension of distortion accumulation to non-Gaussian sources using
the Wasserstein distance as a distance metric [41], although we suspect that a simple form of
distortion accumulation may not be easily obtained.




                                           A PPENDIX A
                                      P ROOF OF L EMMA 2




     Using the chain rule for divergence [15, Theorem 2.5.3], we can expand the divergence
D(Px,y,x+√tz k Px,y,y+√tz ) in two ways:




                        D(Px,y,x+√tz k Px,y,y+√tz )

                      =D(Px+√tz k Py+√tz ) + D(Px,y|x+√tz k Px,y|y+√tz )                         (70)

                      ≥D(Px+√tz k Py+√tz ),

DRAFT                                                                                 February 19, 2018
                                                                                             29


and

                D(Px,y,x+√tz k Px,y,y+√tz )

             =D(Px,y k Px,y ) + D(Px+√tz|x,y k Py+√tz|x,y )

             =D(Px+√tz|x,y k Py+√tz|x,y )
               Z              Z
                      N     N
             =    P (x )dx        P (y N |xN )×
                    dxN            dy N
                                   √                    √        
                      D P xN + tz N |xN , y N P y N + tz N |xN , y N    dy N              (71)
               h     √                  √           i
             =E D P x + tz N |x, y     P y + tz N |x, y

             =E [D (N (x, tIN )k N (y, tIN ))]
                                             
            (a)       1         >
            =E E         (x − y) (x − y) x, y
                      2t
                1 
             = E kx − yk22 ,
                              
                2t
 where (a) follows from a known result (see, e.g., [42, Pg. 13]) that the KL-divergence between
two N -dimensional multivariate normal distributions N (µ0 , Σ0 ) and N (µ1 , Σ1 ) is

                     D (N (µ0 , Σ0 )k N (µ1 , Σ1 ))
                      1
                                                                     
                                                                        det Σ1
                                                                                        (72)
                             −1
                                                   > −1
                    =    tr Σ1 Σ0 − N + (µ1 − µ0 ) Σ1 (µ1 − µ0 ) + ln             .
                      2                                                 det Σ0
Combining (70) and (71), we obtain Lemma 2.


                                                 A PPENDIX B
                                          P ROOFS FOR S ECTION III

A. Proof of Theorem 1

   We first examine the change of distortion on an arbitrary link vb → va as shown in Fig. 1.
Then, we prove this theorem by summing up all distortion on all links. By definition, we have

                                                mmse
                                              y
                                              bS,b   = E [yS |Ib ] ,                      (73)

where Ib denotes all available information at the node vb . Similarly, we have

                                                mmse
                                              y
                                              bS,a   = E [yS |Ia ] .                      (74)

February 19, 2018                                                                        DRAFT
30


However, since the only information available at va to estimate yS is Mb→a , because the data
xi ’s are uncorrelated, we have that

                                         mmse
                                       y
                                       bS,a   = E [yS |Mb→a ] .                                     (75)

     It is certain that Mb→a , the message bits transmitted from node vb to node va , must be a
function of all the available information in vb . This means that σ (Mb→a ) ⊂ σ (Ib ), where σ(·)
denotes the σ-algebra generated by the argument and σ (Ib ) denotes all the available information
                                                                        mmse
including the observations of all random variables at node vb . Since y
                                                                      bS,b   , the conditional
expectation estimate of yS given all the available information in vb , is the projection of yS onto
              mmse                                                                  mmse    mmse
σ (Ib ) and y
            bS,a   is the projection of yS onto σ (Mb→a ) ⊂ σ (Ib ), we have that y
                                                                                  bS,b   −y
                                                                                          bS,a   is
σ (Ib )-measurable. Therefore, using the orthogonality principle (Lemma 1), we can show that

                                    mmse    mmse       mmse
                                                               
                                  y
                                  bS,b   −y
                                          bS,a     ⊥ y
                                                     bS,b   − yS ,                                  (76)

where the LHS is σ (Ib )-measurable, and the RHS is the projection error of the conditional
                       mmse
expectation estimate y
                     bS,b   (Lemma 1 basically says that the projection error E[X|G]−X between
the original vector X and the projection (conditional expectation) E[X|G] is uncorrelated of the
sigma-algebra G, i.e., all G-measurable random variables). Therefore, using Pythagoras theorem
                             mmse         mmse
                           yS,b
and the observation that E[b            yS,a
                                  ] = E[b      ] = E[yS ] = 0N , we get

                                       DbRx = DbTx + DbInc ,                                 (77)
                                 h                i              h                i
                                           mmse 2                          mmse 2
where, recall that DbTx = N1 E yS − y    bS,b   2
                                                    , Db
                                                        Rx
                                                           = 1
                                                             N
                                                               E   y S − y
                                                                         b S,a  2
                                                                                   , and DbInc =
   h                   i
1      mmse     mmse 2
N
  E y bS,b  −y bS,a  2
                         . Since the link vb → va is arbitrarily chosen, equation (77) can be
generalized to all nodes, and hence (11) is proved.
     Now, we show that the distortion DbTx can be written as the sum of the distortions from the
children of vb . Without loss of generality, suppose the node vb has d children v1 , v2 , . . . vd , as
shown in Fig. 1. By definition, we have
                                              d
                                              X
                                       yS =           y Sk + w b x b .                              (78)
                                                k=1

By the definition of MMSE estimator, we have that
                                       " d                #  d
                                        X                    X
                  mmse
                bS,b = E [yS |Ib ] = E
                y                          ySk + wb xb |Ib =   bSmmse
                                                               y  k ,b
                                                                       + w b xb .                   (79)
                                          k=1                            k=1


DRAFT                                                                                    February 19, 2018
                                                                                                   31


Therefore, we have
                                                            d                       d
                          1    h
                                          mmse 2
                                                   i (a) 1 X    h
                                                                          mmse 2
                                                                                 i X
                    DbTx = E       yS − y
                                        bS,b   2
                                                     =         E y Sk − y
                                                                        bSk ,b 2 =     DkRx ,    (80)
                         N                               N k=1                     k=1

                                            bSmmse
where (a) holds because different estimates y  k ,b
                                                    on different links vk → vb are independent of
each other.
   Combining (80) with (77), we have that
                                                      d
                                                      X
                                             DbTx =         DkTx + DkInc .
                                                                        
                                                                                                 (81)
                                                      k=1

Using (81), we can prove (12) using induction in the tree (see Remark 1). Equation (13) is
obtained by carrying out the induction in the tree until the sink node v0 .


B. Proof of Theorem 2

   We still consider the specific set S as shown in Fig. 1. On the link vb → va , we have that
                                           (a)
                                   N Rb→a ≥ H(Mb→a )
                                                mmse
                                   ≥ I(Mb→a ; y
                                              bS,b   )
                                   (b)           mmse    mmse
                                    = I(Mb→a , y
                                               bS,a   ;y
                                                       bS,b   )
                                   (c)    mmse    mmse                mmse mmse
                                    = I(b
                                        yS,a   ;y
                                                bS,b   ) + I(Mb→a ; y
                                                                    bS,b  |b
                                                                           yS,a )
                                         mmse    mmse
                                   ≥ I(b
                                       yS,a   ;y
                                               bS,b   )                                          (82)
                                         mmse         mmse mmse
                                       yS,b
                                   = h(b      ) − h(b
                                                    yS,b  |b
                                                           yS,a )
                                         mmse         mmse    mmse mmse
                                       yS,b
                                   = h(b      ) − h(b
                                                    yS,b   −y
                                                            bS,a  |b
                                                                   yS,a )
                                         mmse         mmse    mmse
                                   ≥ h(b
                                       yS,b   ) − h(b
                                                    yS,b   −y
                                                            bS,a   )
                                   (d)             N
                                         mmse
                                   ≥ h(b
                                       yS,b   )−     log2 2πeDbInc ,
                                                   2
where
   (a)      holds because Mb→a is a binary information sequence;
                            mmse
   (b)      holds because y
                          bS,a   is a function of Mb→a ;
   (c)      follows from the chain rule for mutual information;
   (d)      holds because the entropy-maximizing distribution under variance constraint is Gaus-
            sian.

February 19, 2018                                                                               DRAFT
32


                                         mmse
                                       yS,b
     Now we only need to lower-bound h(b      ). We know that
                                         mmse    mmse
                                       y
                                       bS,b   =y
                                               bS\{b},b + w b xb                                       (83)

                                       yS = yS\{b} + wb xb .                                           (84)
                                  
Suppose y mmse
        bS,b   ∼ r xN and yS ∼ s xN . Observe that (83) and (84) are in the form of the
random variables in Lemma 2 with t = wb2 and z = xb ∼ N (0N , IN ). Then, using Lemma 2,
we have that
                      1
                            
                                                    2
                                                        
                                                                 1 h                  i N DTx
                                           mmse                                mmse 2       b
           D (r||s) ≤ 2 E       yS\{b} − y
                                         bS\{b},b           =        E y S − y S,b     =      .        (85)
                                                                2wb2                     2wb2
                                                                             b      2
                     2wb                            2

     By definition, we have that
                                                                             2
                                                                                 !
                                      N
                                                   1         xN 2
                           yS ∼ s x         = √      N exp −                        .                 (86)
                                                2πσS          2σS2
Therefore,
                                                    N
                                       h(yS ) =       log2 2πeσS2 .                                    (87)
                                                    2
                           mmse
                         yS,b
The difference between h(b       ) and h(yS ) is
                                    Z                       Z
                                                      N
           h(b mmse
             yS,b ) − h(yS ) = −            r log rdx +              s log sdxN
                                      N   N                   N    N
                                    Zx ∈R                   Zx ∈R
                                                  r
                             =−             r log dxN +               (s − r) log sdxN
                                     xN ∈RN       s           xN ∈RN
                                                                                   2
                                                                                     !                 (88)
                                                                              xN 2
                                                      Z
                             (a)
                             = −D (r||s) + log2 e               (s − r) −        2
                                                                                       dxN
                                                         N
                                                       x ∈R  N                2σ S

                                               log2 e   h
                                                            mmse 2
                                                                              i
                             = −D (r||s) +            E y  bS,b      − kyS k22 ,
                                                2σS2               2

where we used (86) in step (a). The second term of the RHS can be bounded by
           h                    i      h               > mmse          i
               mmse 2         2            mmse
         E y bS,b   2
                      − ky  k
                           S 2    =  E   y
                                         b S,b  −  y S    yb S,b  + y S
                                    r h                    i h                     i
                                              mmse       2         mmse          2
                                  ≤ E y    bS,b    − yS 2 E y     bS,b   + yS 2
                                    r           h                          i
                                                                         2
                                  = N DbTx E y      mmse
                                                   bS,b  − yS + 2yS 2                                  (89)
                                    r             n                  h                io
                                           Tx                  2           mmse     2
                                  ≤ N Db · 2 E 4 kyS k2 + E y             bS,b − yS 2
                                    q
                                  = 2N DbTx (4N σS2 + N DbTx ).

DRAFT                                                                                       February 19, 2018
                                                                                                      33


Therefore, combining (85) and (87)-(89), we get
                                    N DbTx N log2 e
                                                    q
                        mmse
                    h(b
                      yS,b   ) ≥ h(yS ) −  −         2DbTx (4σS2 + DbTx )
                                     2wb2     2σS2
                                                                                                   (90)
                     N             N DbTx N log2 e
                                                   q
                               2
                    = log2 2πeσS −        −         2DbTx (4σS2 + DbTx ).
                     2              2wb2     2σS2
Plugging the above inequality into (82), we get
                            1    σS2    DbTx log2 e
                                                     q
                      Rb→a ≥ log2 Inc −      −         2DbTx (4σS2 + DbTx )
                            2    Db     2wb2   2σS2
                                                                                                   (91)
                            1    σS2
                                      − O (DbTx )1/2 ,
                                                    
                           = log2 Inc
                            2    Db
in the limit of small DbTx . Summing (91) over all links, we get
              n                  n 
                                         σS2 i       DiTx log2 e
                                                                                       
                              1X
             X                                                      q                
                                                                           Tx   2 Tx
                 Ri→PN(i) ≥          log2 Inc −           −           2Di 4σSi + Di      .
             i=1
                              2 i=1      Di          2wi2    2σS2 i
                                 n 
                                                                                                   (92)
                                               σS2 i
                                                                            
                              1X                                    Tx 1/2
                                                                           
                          =         log2 Rx               − O (Di )           ,
                              2 i=1      Di − DiTx

in the limit of small DiTx , ∀i. The last equality in (92) can be obtained using DiRx = DiTx +DiInc (see
the distortion accumulation equation (11)). The optimization bound shown in (15) is basically the
same bound (92) stated in an optimization form over the choices of the incremental distortions
DiInc . Now, we prove that the solution of the optimization satisfies (17), which finally leads to
the order-sense bound (18). When the constraints in (15) are satisfied,
                                 n 
                                          σS2 i
                                                            
                              1X                        Tx
                                                           
                          R≥         log2 Inc − ψi Di
                              2 i=1      Di
                                            n
                                                  σS2 i
                                            Q
                                                             n
                               (a) 1                      1X
                                            i=1
                               ≥       log2 Qn          −       ψi (D0mmse )
                                   2                Inc   2 i=1
                                                 Di
                                           i=1
                                              n                                                    (93)
                                                     σS2 i
                                              Q
                                                     n
                               (b) 1               1X
                               ≥ log2 i=1        −      ψi (D0mmse )
                                2    (D0mmse /n)n 2 i=1
                                            n
                                                  σS2 i
                                            Q
                                                 n
                               (c) 1          1X
                               ≥ log2 i=1 n −       ψi (D) ,
                                2    (D/n)    2 i=1

where (a) holds because DiTx < D0mmse (which can be easily seen by comparing (12) and (13))
and the functions ψi (·), i = 1, . . . n are monotone, (b) follows from the constraint D0mmse =

February 19, 2018                                                                                 DRAFT
34

Pn        Inc
     i=1 Di     in (13) and the fact that the arithmetic mean is greater or equal to the geometric
mean, and (c) follows from the inequality D0mmse ≤ D in (10). Further, using the fact that
          D     log2 e
                       q                 √
ψi (D) = 2w 2 + 2σ 2
                        2D 4σS2 i + D = O( D), we obtain the lower bound (18).
                i     Si



C. Proof of Theorem 3

     We still look at a specific set S as shown in Fig. 1. Then, we have
                           N Rb→a ≥ H(Mb→a )

                            ≥ I(Mb→a ; yS )

                            = h(yS ) − h(yS |Mb→a )
                                                      mmse
                            = h(yS ) − h(yS |Mb→a , y
                                                    bS,a   )                                     (94)
                                                mmse mmse
                            = h(yS ) − h(yS − y
                                              bS,a  |b
                                                     yS,a , Mb→a )
                                                mmse
                            ≥ h(yS ) − h(yS − y
                                              bS,a   )
                         N               N                N  σS2
                            log2 2πeσS2 − log2 2πeDbRx = log2 Rx
                            ≥                                    .
                          2               2               2  Db
Summing (94) over all links, we get the outer bound (19).

                                              A PPENDIX C
                                       P ROOFS FOR S ECTION IV

A. A Review on Gaussian Test Channels

  First, we elaborate on the details of Gaussian test channels. Suppose a transmitter has a source
X ∼ N (0, P ) and wishes to send an approximate description X    b to a receiver with distortion D.
Then
                        R(D) =       min              b = 1 log P , ∀P ≥ D.
                                                 I(X; X)                                         (95)
                               x|x):E[(X−X)
                             p(b         b 2 ]≤D          2     D
The “test channel” in this case is the inverse Gaussian channel
                                                b + Z,
                                              X=X                                                (96)

where Z ∼ N (0, D) is an additive noise independent of X
                                                       b (see [15, Theorem 10.3.2]). The test
channel is useful for understanding orthogonality properties of codewords in random codebooks.
                                                       c(w) : w ∈ {1, 2, . . . 2N R }} with joint
To achieve the rate in (95), we can use a random code {b
                                                      c(w) is generated i.i.d. with each entry
typicality encoding and decoding, where each codeword b
distributed as N (0, P − D). When N → ∞, the rate (95) is asymptotically achieved.

DRAFT                                                                                 February 19, 2018
                                                                                                       35


B. Proof of (38)

   We use induction in the tree (see Remark 1) to prove (38). For an arbitrary leaf vl , we know
     bl2 = σS2 l = wl2 . For an arbitrary non-leaf node vb , we have that (see (32))
that σ
                                             d
                                             X
                                     bb2 =
                                     σ              σk2 − db ) + wb2 .
                                                   (b                                                (97)
                                             k=1

By definition, we have
                                                d
                                                X
                                       yS =           y Sk + w b x b ,                               (98)
                                                k=1

which means
                                                d
                                                X
                                      σS2 b =         σS2 k + wb wb2 ,                               (99)
                                                k=1

Comparing (97) and (99), we know that, if (38) holds at all children of vb , it also holds at vb .
Thus, by induction in the tree, we can show that (38) is true.


C. Proof of Lemma 3

   The key idea is to use the generalized covering lemma [32, pg. 70], which is rephrased as
follows.
                                                                         (N )
                                                         / T
Lemma 7. Suppose x is an arbitrary sequence and lim Pr(x ∈                                      b(m), m ∈
                                                                                (pX )) = 0. Let x
                                                           N →∞
A, where |A| > 2nR , be random sequences independent from x, each distributed according to
pXb . Then, there exists δ(ε) → 0 as ε → 0 such that
                                                                
                                                (N )
                         lim Pr (x, xb(m)) ∈/ T (pX,Xb ), ∀m ∈ A = 0,
                        N →∞

            b + δ(ε).
if R > I(X; X)

   The covering lemma follows directly from the conditional typicality lemma and the joint
typicality lemma, e.g., see [32] and other recent works such as [24] [25] [10] on distributed
source coding and computing. The original covering lemma is stated for discrete sources with a
finite distortion measure and strong typicality. The generalized version to abstract sources with
infinite measure has been obtained in [38], [43]. We first present this version of the generalized
covering lemma.

Lemma 8 (Generalized covering lemma in [38], page 18, Theorem IV.5). Let R ≥ 0 be a
nonnegative real number such that R > I(y; z). Then, there exists a µY Z -typicality criterion W0

February 19, 2018                                                                                  DRAFT
36


and a positive number c > 0 such that, for any µY Z -typicality criterion W ≤ W0 , there exists a
µY -typicality criterion V so that we have the following for all sufficiently large n ∈ Z+ :
         Let IN be a finite set with |IN | ≥ 2N R . Let yN be a random variable taking values in Y N ,
and for each m ∈ IN , let zN (m) be a random variable taking values in Z N . Assume that for
m, m0 ∈ IN with m 6= m0 , (zN (m), zN (m0 )) follows a distribution µN    N
                                                                     Z × µZ . Then we have
                                                                                                             
                                (N )                        (N )
                Pr y    N
                            ∈ TV (µY ) and (yN , zN (m)) ∈
                                                         / TW (µY Z )                     for all m ∈ IN ≤ 2−cN .

         The generalization of the classical typicality is stated using a typicality definition called “µ-
typicality”, where µ is a probability measure, or a probability density function on a general
alphabet X on which the typical sets are defined. The alphabet can be discrete or continuous (in-
cluding a d-dimensional space). The key definition of typicality involves a triple U = (F , , N )
called a “typicality criterion”. In this triple, the set F is called the “typicality requirements”
and is composed of a finite set of µ-integrable functions {f1 , f2 , . . . fM } (i.e., the expectation of
these functions Eµ [f ] with respect to µ is finite) that are used for defining the typical set. For
example, choosing F to be a single point set containing the log-likelihood function corresponds
to weak-typicality, or containing the indicator functions corresponds to strong typicality (see
the book by Cover and Thomas [15, Section 13.6]). The constant  in definition of W is the
usual small value for bounding the difference between empirical mean and true expectation of
the functions in F , such as the constant εN in equations (33) to (36). The set N is a µ-null
set (0-measure set with respect to the measure µ) which is only used for some special cases.
When the density function µ and the typicality requirement set F = {f1 , f2 , . . . fk } is defined,
the typical set is defined as (see Definition II.2 in [38])
                      (                          N            Z                      )
         (n)                                 1  X
      TU (µ) :=         xN ∈ (X \ N )N :             f (xi ) − f dµ ≤  for all f ∈ F . (100)
                                             N i=1

         In the definitions of typical sets ((33) to (36) in this response), the set F is defined using
appropriate functions. For example, in (33), F consists of the functions log qU (·) and k·k2 . Note
that EqU [log qU (x)] and EqU [kxk2 ] are the differential entropy of qU and the second moment
of qU , which are always finite for Gaussian distributions8 . Therefore, (33) to (36) are all valid

     8
         Note that for scalar Gaussian distributions EqU [log qU (x)] and EqU [kxk2 ] are linear functions of each other. However, this
does not matter because a typicality requirement can definitely include the same functions.


DRAFT                                                                                                                 February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                           37


typicality criteria. Here are some key properties of µ-typicality that may help further explain the
concept:

      •   To define a typical set, you have to first specify the density function µ and the typicality
          requirements F . The expectation Eµ [f ] = f dµ for f ∈ F must be respect to µ, rather
                                                       R

          than any other distribution.
      •   If the sequence xN is distributed according to µN , it automatically belongs to any valid
          typicality criterion defined for µ with high probability, because of the law of large numbers.

      Now we explain the generalized covering lemma. In the first sentence of the lemma (“Let R ≥
0 be a nonnegative real number [...]”), the variable R is the coding rate so R > I(y; z) simply
means the coding rate has to be bigger than the mutual information9 . The mutual information
is defined as (see the end of page 16 in [38]) I(y; z) = D(µY Z ||µY µZ ).
      At first, we skip the sentence “Then, there exists a µY Z -typicality criterion [...]” (we will
explain it later) and look at the middle part of the generalized covering lemma (“let IN be a
finite set with [...]”). The set IN is the codeword index set. The random variable yN is the source
sequence (note that this sequence can be an arbitrary sequence and is not the N -fold product
of the random variable y in the mutual information I(y; z)). The random variable zN (m) for
each m is a codeword sequence and each of its coordinate follows the density function µZ . The
sentence “Assume that for m, m0 ∈ IN [...]” means that all codewords are pairwise independent.
Then, the last equation of the covering lemma states that, the probability that the sequence yN is
typical, but the sequence (yN , zN (m)) are not jointly typical for all codewords zN (m), m ∈ IN
is exponentially small in the code length N .
      Now let us examine the sentence “Then, there exists a µY Z -typicality criterion [...]” which is
somewhat subtle. It may seem that from this definition, the typicality criteria W0 and V (which
are defined based on two sets of typicality requirements FW0 and FV ) exist but have not been
written explicitly. In fact, they can be defined explicitly, but the construction is quite careful.
The explicit constructions of these typicality criterion can be found in [38, Pg. 12-14]. In this
paper, We only need the existence of W0 and U typicality criterion, and hence for our use the


  9
      Note that in the original paper [38] the generalized covering lemma has an auxiliary random variable x that is useful in
multi-terminal source coding problems. For our problem with independent sources at different nodes, the auxiliary variable x
in the generalized covering lemma does not exist so we just removed all terms related to the random variable x.


February 19, 2018                                                                                                      DRAFT
38



                                                                v0
                                           v1
                                                      ENC              ENC        v2



                                            v3        v4                v5         v6


Fig. 2.   This is an illustration of the typicality encoding in a simple two-layer tree network.




lemma as stated above suffices.
     Next, it may also seem that the generalized covering lemma does not apply to the problem in
our paper because the construction of typicality requirements in [38] does not necessarily include
the typicality requirements for function log qU (·) and k·k in (33) to (36). In fact, the inequality
W ≤ W0 is the key of the generalized covering lemma. It means W can be any typicality
criterion that has stricter typicality requirements than W0 . More specifically, one can incorporate
any classical typicality requirements (e.g. weak or strong typicality) into the typicality criterion
W by adding more µ-integrable functions into the function set F in W = (F , , N ).
     Now we make explicit the use of this generalized version of covering lemma in our problem.
In order to avoid cumbersome notation, we will only look at a specific example shown in Fig. 2.
At a particular node vi , there are three sequences: the source sequence xi , the estimate sequence
ŝi which is the estimate of the partial sum yi , and the description sequence r̂i which is the
chosen codeword to be transmitted from node vi to its parent node. These sequences are defined
in Section IV-B. At the root note v0 , there is only an estimate sequence ŝ0 , which is the estimate
of the overall sum. We will use mathematical induction to define µ-typical sets from the root to
the leaves of the tree network. This will ensure that the estimate sequence ŝi and the description
sequence r̂i for each node vi lie inside the typical sets in (33) to (36) with high probability.
     At the root node, the estimate sequence ŝ0 = r̂1 + r̂2 . Therefore, for ŝ0 to be typical with
                                                                                                       N
respect to (33), r̂1 and r̂2 have to satisfy the joint typicality criterion that the sum r̂1 + r̂2 ∈ TU, .
To be specific, the two dimensional sequence (r̂1 , r̂2 ) has to satisfy the typicality requirement
F1,2 defined by the “sum-square function” f (r1 , r2 ) = (r1 + r2 )2 and the sum-log qU function

DRAFT                                                                                              February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                  39


g(r1 , r2 ) = log qU (r1 + r2 ), which are
                                 N
                                 X
                          |1/N         f (r̂1i , r̂2i ) − EV1TC ,V2TC [f (V1TC , V2TC )]| <                  (101)
                                 i=1
                                 N
                                 X
                          |1/N         g(r̂1i , r̂2i ) − EV1TC ,V2TC [g(V1TC , V2TC )]| < ,                  (102)
                                 i=1


where V1TC and V2TC are the test-channel random variables that are used to define the density
functions respect to which r̂1 and r̂2 are typical.
   Now, look at the second layer of the network, which is composed of two nodes v1 and v2 .
In this layer, we will use the generalized covering lemma. The description sequences r̂1 and
r̂1 are the output (the chosen codewords zN (m)) in the generalized covering lemma. Note that
although the two sequences r̂1 and r̂1 are jointly typical, the codewords at two nodes v0 and v1 can
be separately generated because the joint density factorizes as φ(V1TC , V2TC ) = φ(V1TC )φ(V2TC ).
The input (the sequence yN in the generalized covering lemma) to the second layer are the
collections of description sequences and the sources sequences (r̂3 , r̂4 , r̂5 , r̂6 , x1 , x2 ). Apart from
the typicality requirement F1,2 , the output and the input have to satisfy the joint typicality
requirements specified in (33) to (36), which we denote by G1,2 .
   Then, according to the generalized covering lemma, there exists a typicality criterion W0 so
that we can find two codewords (r̂1 , r̂2 ) that are jointly typical with the sequence (r̂3 , r̂4 , r̂5 , r̂6 , x1 , x2 ).
Then, we add the joint typicality requirements F1,2 ∪ G1,2 to W0 to get the new joint-typicality
criterion W (as we mentioned earlier, the covering lemma holds for any typicality criterion
W ≤ W0 , we can add any typicality requirements that are µ-integrable). Note that the generalized
covering lemma requires that the source (r̂3 , r̂4 , r̂5 , r̂6 , x1 , x2 ) satisfy an extra typicality criterion
V (see the generalized covering lemma and the explanation). This is very similar to the joint
typicality requirement F1,2 that we have used to define the typicality criterion in the second
layer of the network, and we can use the same method to define the joint typicality criterion at
the third layer.
   The general induction method in the tree network goes in the following manner:

   •   Specify the output ol and input il at each layer l;
   •   Define the typicality criterion at each layer from the first layer (the root node) to the last
       layer (the leaves that have the largest distance to the root);

February 19, 2018                                                                                             DRAFT
40


     •   At each layer l, the definition of the typicality criterion at layer l−1 imposes extra typicality
         criterion Vl−1 at the output of layer l. Compute the union of the typicality criterion Vl−1
         and the criterion imposed by (33)-(36) at layer l and apply the generalized covering lemma.
         This definition process at the layer l will impost extra typicality criterion Vl to the output
         of the (l + 1)-th layer.
     •   Repeat the above process until the last layer of the network.



     Using this definition, the joint typicality requirement at each node in the network is always the
weak joint typicality requirement (35) in addition to a finite set of extra typicality requirements.
According to the covering lemma, all of these typicality requirements will hold with high
probability. This is ensured by the definition of typicality criterion and the definition of typical
sequences. When the covering lemma holds, all sequences will be typical with high probability.
To be more specific, they will be atypical with exponentially small probability in the code
length N . We use the generalized covering lemma to ensure that all description sequences sN
                                                                                           i
                                                                              1
and estimate sequences rN                                                          N    N
                        i are jointly typical (so that the empirical distance N ||si − ri || ≈ di

with high probability). The conclusion (42) can thus be obtained. After that, we use the other
lemmas in the revised manuscript (Lemma 4 to Lemma 6 in our own paper) to compute the
expectation of mean-square error at all nodes.

     To summarize, we again comment on how the conclusion (42) can be obtained by induction in
the tree network (see Remark 1). First, on an arbitrary leaf vl , the rate satisfies Rl > I(UlTC ; VlTC )
(see (37)). According to the covering lemma, there exists a codeword cl (MlP N (l) ) jointly typical
with data xl with high probability. This also ensures that, with high probability, the recon-
struction VlTC at the parent-node vP N (l) is typical with respect to distribution φVlTC . On an
arbitrary non-leaf node vb , the estimate bsb defined by (40) is typical with respect to φUbTC with
high probability, provided that all descriptions V1TC , . . . VdTC from the children of vb are typical
with high probability (which is ensured by induction). Since rate satisfies Rb > I(UbTC ; VbTC ),
according to the covering lemma, there exists a codeword cb (Mb→a ) jointly typical with data
xb and reconstructions ck (Mk→b ), k = 1, . . . d with high probability. This also ensures that the
codeword cb (Mb→a ) is typical with respect to distribution φVbTC . Thus, it is clear that equation (42)
can be proved using induction in the tree.

DRAFT                                                                                       February 19, 2018
                                                                                                41


D. Proof of Lemma 4

   We prove this lemma using induction in the tree (see Remark 1). At an arbitrary leaf vl , the
estimate bsl = wl xl satisfies
                                                             
                                    1       2       1         2
                                  E   kbsl k2 = E     kwl xl k2 = wl2 ,                     (103)
                                    N               N
      bl2 = wl2 , which is the variance of the scalar random variable UlTC . Therefore, (43) holds
while σ
for the leaf vb with εlN > 0, where lim εlN = 0. That is
                                           N →∞
                                                   
                                          1       2
                                        E             bl2 < εlN .
                                            kbsl k2 − σ                                     (104)
                                          N
                    rl ,
For the description b
                                                                          
       1      2                 1      2                        1      2
  E       rl k2 = Pr(El = 1)E
         kb                        rl k2 El = 1 + Pr(El = 0)E
                                  kb                               rl k2 El = 0 ,
                                                                  kb                        (105)
       N                        N                               N

where El is the indicator random variable of an encoding failure at a leaf vl . Recall that when
El = 1, no codeword generated at vl is jointly typical with the source message wl xl and the 0-th
                                                                        rl is typical with
codeword, which is also a random codeword, is transmitted. When El = 0, b
respect to the distribution φVlTC , and hence

                                       1
                                          rl k22 − (b
                                         kb         σl2 − dl ) < εlN ,                      (106)
                                       N
where lim εlN = 0. When El = 1,
         N →∞
                                                                
          1      2              1         2              1         2
        E    rl k2 El = 1 = E
            kb                    kcl (0)k2 El = 1 = E                 bl2 − dl .
                                                           kcl (0)k2 = σ                    (107)
          N                     N                        N

Suppose Pr(El = 0) = 1 − βlN , where lim βlN = 0, then
                                               N →∞
                                      
                            1
                         E     rl k22 − (b
                              kb           σl2 − dl )
                           N
                                                                   
                                              1        2
                        < Pr(El = 1) E           kbrl k2 El = 1 − (b    σl2 − dl )
                                             N
                                                                     
                                                  1        2                                (108)
                          + Pr(El = 0) E            kb rl k2 El = 0 − (b   σl2 − dl )
                                                N
                                                 
                                    1           2
                        = βlN E       kcl (0)k2 − (b      σl2 − dl ) + (1 − βlN )εlN
                                   N
                        < εlN .

February 19, 2018                                                                           DRAFT
42


Therefore, (44) holds for the leaf vl . To prove (45) for a leaf vl , we have to use the following
fact
                                                        
                                         1       2
                             Pr(El = 1)E   kbsl k2 El = 1 < αlN ,                             (109)
                                         N

where lim αlN = 0. This can be proved as follows. First, we have that
        N →∞

                                                                             
                 1       2              1       2                 1       2
     Pr(El = 1)E   kbsl k2 El = 1 = E     kbsl k2 − Pr(El = 0)E     kbsl k2 El = 0 .          (110)
                 N                      N                         N

From (104),
                                                 
                                        1       2
                                      E             bl2 + εlN .
                                          kbsl k2 < σ                                         (111)
                                        N

When El = 0, bsl is typical with respect to the distribution pUlTC , and hence
                                                  
                                   1       2
                                 E                    bl2 − εlN ,
                                     kbsl k2 El = 0 > σ                                       (112)
                                   N

when N is large enough. Therefore,
                                            
                             1       2
                                                                      bl2 − εlN
                                               σl2 + εlN − (1 − βlN ) σ
                                                                                
                 Pr(El = 1)E   kbsl k2 El = 1 <b
                             N                                                                (113)
                                                       bl2 +(2 − βlN )εlN =: αlN .
                                                  =βlN σ

Then, we prove (45) for a leaf vl . We notice that
                                                                         
                     1            2                   1            2
                   E    rl − bsl k2 = Pr (El = 1) E
                       kb                                rl − bsl k2 El = 1
                                                        kb
                     N                                N
                                                                                            (114)
                                                        1             2
                                      + Pr (El = 0) E       rl − bsl k2 El = 0 .
                                                           kb
                                                        N

                                                             rl are jointly typical and encoding
When El = 0, i.e., when the estimate bsl and the description b
is successful,
                                      1                      εlN
                                         rl − bsl k22 − dl <
                                        kb                       ,                            (115)
                                      N                       2

                                                         rl = cl (0) is a predetermined
where lim εlN = 0. When Eb = 1, the transmitted sequence b
        N →∞
                                               rl is independent of bsl conditioned on Eb = 1.
random sequence independent of bsl , and hence b

DRAFT                                                                                February 19, 2018
                                                                                                    43


Therefore,
                                                                
                                      1             2
                                E         rl − bsl k2 Eb = 1 − dl .
                                         kb
                                     N
                                                                        
                                      1       2     1        2
                             =E           rl k2 + kbsl k2 Eb = 1 − dl
                                         kb
                                     N             N
                                                                                    
                                      1       2                       1        2
                             =E           rl k2 Eb = 1 + E
                                         kb                              kbsl k2 Eb = 1 − dl
                                     N                                N
                                                                                            (116)
                            (a)      1          2             1        2
                            =E          kcl (0)k2 + E            kbsl k2 Eb = 1 − dl
                                    N                        N
                                                                          
                                   2                 1         2
                             = (bσl − dl ) + E          kbsl k2 Eb = 1 − dl
                                                    N
                                                                        
                                 2                  1        2
                             =σ bl − 2dl + E           kbsl k2 Eb = 1 .
                                                    N

where (a) holds because cl (0) is independent of Eb . Combining (114)-(116) and (109), we get
                               
                 1            2
            E       rl − bsl k2 − dl
                   kb
                N
                                                                 
                                   2               1       2                            (117)
            < Pr (El = 1) · (b    σl − 2dl ) + E     kbsl k2 El = 1 + Pr (El = 0) εlN
                                                   N
                           σl2 − 2dl ) + αlN + (1 − βlN )εlN =: ηlN ,
                    < βlN (b

where limN →∞ ηlN = 0, which can be readily verified from limN →∞ αlN , βlN , εlN = 0. Until
now, we have proved (43), (44) and (45) for a leaf vl .
   For a non-leaf node vb , we only prove (43), because the proof of (44) and (45) is exactly the
same as the proof for the case of a leaf, provided that (43) holds. In what follows, we assume
that (43), (44) and (45) hold for all children v1 , v2 , . . . vd of a non-leaf node vb . Since at the
non-leaf node vb ,
                                                        d
                                                        X
                                                bsb =         r k + w b xb ,
                                                              b                                 (118)
                                                        k=1

we have that
                                                  Xd              
                                        1       2           1      2
                                      E   kbsb k2 =     E      rk k2 + wb2 .
                                                              kb                                (119)
                                        N           k=1
                                                            N

Using the variance relation (32) and the fact that (44) holds for all children of vb , we obtain that
(43) holds for vb .

February 19, 2018                                                                               DRAFT
44


E. Proof of Lemma 5

     To prove Lemma 5, we first prove that the following divergence-bounds hold for all nodes vb :

                                                      
                                         D pbsb k φN
                                                   U TC < N γb,N ,                                 (120)
                                                     b




                                                       
                                         D pbrb k φN
                                                   V TC      eb,N ,
                                                          < Nγ                                     (121)
                                                     b



                                            rb , φN
where pbsb and pbrb are the pdfs of bsb and b     U TC
                                                       and φN
                                                            V TC
                                                                 are the N -fold products of pdfs φUbTC
                                                     b        b

and φ   VbTC   , which are the pdfs of the test-channel random variables UbTC and VbTC that are defined
                              eb,N are two small constants such that limN →∞ γb,N = 0 and
in Section IV-A, and γb,N and γ
        eb,N = 0. In order to prove (120) and (121) for all nodes, we first prove the following
limN →∞ γ
three statements.
     Statement 1: Inequality (120) holds for all leaves.
     Statement 2: If (120) holds at an arbitrary node vb , then (121) also holds at node vb .
     Statement 3: If (121) holds at all children of a non-leaf node vb , then (120) holds at vb .
     These three statements together can be used to prove (120) and (121) for all nodes in the
graph using induction in the tree (see Remark 1).
     1) Proof of Statement 1: At an arbitrary leaf vl , according to the encoding scheme, the
estimate bsl = wl xl is an N -dimensional Gaussian random vector, each entry of which has pdf
φUlTC (which is the pdf of the test-channel-based random variable UlTC ). Therefore, at vl , we have
pbsl = φN
        U TC
             . So the first statement is true, since the KL-divergence is zero.
           l

                                                                                  rb given bsb , and by
     2) Proof of Statement 2: Denote by pbrb |bsb the conditional distribution of b
φNVbTC |UbTC
             the N -fold product of the conditional distribution φV TC |U TC of the test-channel-based
                                                                   b     b

random variables. Suppose (120) holds at vb , we will prove that (121) also holds at vb .

Lemma 9. For each node vb ,

                                      1                     
                                        D pbrb |bsb φN
                                                     Vb |Ub
                                                       TC TC   < ηb,N ,                            (122)
                                      N

where limN →∞ ηb,N = 0.

       Proof: See Appendix C-G.

DRAFT                                                                                     February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                            45

                                                                              
   Using the chain rule of KL-divergence, we can expand D pbsb ,brb k φNTC
                                                                       U ,V TC   in the following
                                                                                                         b   b

two ways:
                                                                  
                                          D pbsb ,brb k φN  TC
                                                          Ub ,VbTC

                                                                                         
                                         =D pbsb k φN  UbTC    + D    pbr  |b
                                                                         b bs  φN
                                                                                Vb |Ub
                                                                                   TC    TC                              (123)
                                                                                         
                                         =D pbrb k φN  V TC    + D    pbsb |b
                                                                            rb φ N
                                                                                 U TC |V TC
                                                                                              .
                                                                b                        b        b

Therefore, using Lemma 9 and using the induction assumption that (120) holds at vb , we have
that
                                                                                         
         D       pbrb k φN
                         VbTC       ≤D       pbsb k φN
                                                     UbTC       + D pbrb |bsb   φN
                                                                                 VbTC |UbTC
                                                                                                  ≤ N (e
                                                                                                       ηb,N + γb,N ) .   (124)

         eb,N = ηeb,N + γb,N , we can show that Statement 2 is true.
Defining γ
   3) Proof of Statement 3: To prove this statement, we need the following lemma:

Lemma 10. Denote by x and y two absolutely continuous and independent random vectors
supported in RN , and denote by px (·) and py (·) the pdfs of x and y. Denote by px+y (·) the
pdf of x + y. We know that px+y (·) is the convolution of px (·) and py (·). Then, if there exist
two distribution functions qx0 (·) and qy0 (·) of two other independent random variables x0 and y0
such that
                                                                D (px kqx0 ) < 1 ,                                      (125)



                                                                D (py kqy0 ) < 2 ,                                      (126)

we have
                                                    D (px+y kqx0 +y0 ) < 1 + 2 ,                                       (127)

where qx0 +y0 is the convolution of qx0 and qy0 , which is also the pdf of the random variable
x0 + y 0 .

       Proof: Using the chain rule of KL-divergence, we can expand D(px+y,x kqx0 +y0 ,x0 ) in the
following two ways:
                                              D(px+y,x kqx0 +y0 ,x0 )

                                          =D(px+y kqx0 +y0 ) + D(px|x+y kqx0 |x0 +y0 )                                   (128)

                                          =D(px kqx0 ) + D(px+y|x kqx0 +y0 |x0 ).

February 19, 2018                                                                                                        DRAFT
46


We denote by B(x, δ) the N -dimensional ball centered at x with volume δ. Then, when x and
y are independent, for a small constant δ,

                                     Pr(x + y ∈ B(x + y, δ)|x = x)

                                   = Pr(y ∈ B(y, δ)|x = x)                                            (129)

                                   = Pr(y ∈ B(y, δ)),
where the conditional probability, such as Pr(A|x = x), is defined in the sense of regular
conditional probability [44], which can be written as
                                                         Pr(A ∩ Um )
                                  Pr(A|x = x) = lim                  ,                                (130)
                                                     m→∞   Pr(Um )
where U1 ⊃ U2 ⊃ U3 . . . is a sequence of sets such that {x = x} ⊂ Um , ∀m and

                                            lim vol(Um ) = 0.                                         (131)
                                           m→∞

The regular conditional probabilities (and densities) exist because the random variables are
absolutely continuous and take values in Polish spaces (complete and separable metric spaces).
Therefore, we have that px+y|x=x (x+y) = py (y). Similarly, qx0 +y0 |x0 =x (x+y) = qy0 (y). Therefore,


                              D(px+y|x=x kqx0 +y0 |x0 =x ) = D(py kqy0 ), ∀x.                         (132)

Therefore, (128) changes to

                  D(px+y kqx0 +y0 ) + D(px|x+y kqx0 |x0 +y0 ) < D(px kqx0 ) + D(py kqy0 ).            (133)

Noticing that D(px|x+y kqx0 |x0 +y0 ) > 0, we have

                              D(px+y kqx0 +y0 ) < D(px kqx0 ) + D(py kqy0 ),                          (134)

which concludes the proof.
     Now we prove Statement 3. Based on the induction assumption, suppose that for all child
nodes vi of vb , 1 ≤ i ≤ d,
                                        1               
                                          D pbri k φN
                                                    ViTC    ei,N .
                                                           <γ                                         (135)
                                        N
Considering
     •   Gaussian random codes:
                                                     d
                                                     X
                                             bsb =         ri + wb xb ,
                                                           b                                          (136)
                                                     i=1


DRAFT                                                                                        February 19, 2018
                                                                                                  47


   •   Test-channel Random Variables:
                                                 d
                                                 X
                                        UbTC =         ViTC + wb Xb ,                         (137)
                                                 i=1
(see equation (40) and (30)) and using Lemma 10, we have that
                                      d                      d
                  1          N
                                   X    1          N
                                                          X
                    D pbsb k φU TC <       D pbri k φV TC <     γ
                                                                ei,N =: γb,N ,                (138)
                 N             b
                                     i=1
                                         N            i
                                                            i=1
which concludes the proof of Statement 3.
   4) Using Statement 1-3 to Prove Lemma 5: We only provide the proof for (46) (the first
inequality in Lemma 5) using the divergence bound (120) because the proof for (47) using (121)
is exactly the same.
   To simplify notation, we use p(·) and q(·) to denote pbsb (·) and φN
                                                                      U TC
                                                                           (·). Then, by definition,
                                                                                    b

we have that                                                            2
                                                                            !
                                N            1       xN 2
                             q(x ) = √      N exp −                            .             (139)
                                         σb
                                       2πb            σb2
                                                     2b
and
                                                 N
                                        h(q) =             σb2 .
                                                   log2 2πeb                                  (140)
                                                 2
   The difference between h(p) and h(q) is
                                       Z                   Z
                      h(p) − h(q) = −          p log pdx +         q log qdx
                                         x∈RN                x∈RN
                           Z                   Z
                                       p
                      =−          p log dx +           (q − p) log qdx
                            x∈RN       q         x∈RN
                                                                       !                      (141)
                                                                 kxk22
                                            Z
                      (a)
                       = −D (p||q) + log2 e         (q − p) − 2 dx
                                              x∈RN               2bσb
                                     log2 e 
                                            E kbsb k22 − N σ
                                                           bb2 ,
                                                              
                        = −D (p||q) +    2
                                      2bσb
where we used (139) in step (a). The first term of the RHS can be bounded by the divergence
bound (120) and the second term of the RHS can be bounded by Lemma 4:

                                 E kbsb k22 − N σ
                                                bb2 < N εN ,
                                          
                                                                                              (142)

where limN →∞ εN = 0. Therefore, combining (120) and (140)-(142), we get
                                                log2 e 
                                                      E kbsb k22 − N σ
                                                                     bb2
                                                                         
                     h(p) ≥ h(q) − D (p||q) +       2
                                                  σb
                                                 2b
                                                                                              (143)
                        N                         log2 e
                      > log2 2πeb  σb2 − N γb,N −        εN N.
                        2                          2bσb2
By defining βN = max1≤b≤n γb,N + log
                                  2b
                                     2e
                                   σ2 N
                                        ε , we conclude that (46) is true.
                                         b



February 19, 2018                                                                             DRAFT
48


F. Proof of Lemma 6

      To simplify notation, for an arbitrary node vb and its parent node va = vPN(b) define

                                                           bs∗b = y
                                                                  bSmmse
                                                                     b ,b
                                                                          ,                                                  (144)

                                                           r∗b = y
                                                           b     bSmmse
                                                                    b ,PN(b)
                                                                             .                                               (145)

                                                                                   r∗b is the MMSE
Therefore, bs∗b is the MMSE estimate of the partial sum ySb at the node vb , while b
estimate of the same variable, but at the parent-node vPN(b) . In order to relate the Gaussian-code-
based distortion and the MMSE-based distortion, we will prove that, the estimates based on the
                                                          rb , are very close to the MMSE estimates
Gaussian code, i.e., the estimate bsb and the description b
         r∗b in the sense of mean-square error10 . We prove that as long as N is finite but sufficiently
bs∗b and b
large, the gap between these two types of estimators can be arbitrarily small. Define
                                                             
                                    Tx       1           ∗ 2
                                  ∆b = E        kbsb − bsb k2 ,                                                              (146)
                                             N
                                                             
                                    Rx        1           ∗ 2
                                  ∆b = E        kbrb − br b k2 .                                                             (147)
                                             N
We will prove that ∆Tx         Rx
                    b → 0 and ∆b → 0 when N → ∞. In particular, we will prove the

following three statements:
      Statement 1: For an arbitrary leaf vl ,

                                                              ∆Tx
                                                               l = 0.                                                        (148)

      Statement 2: For an arbitrary non-leaf node vb and its d children v1 , . . . vd (see Fig. 1),
                                                       q     d q
                                                             X
                                                         Tx
                                                        ∆b ≤    ∆Rx
                                                                 k .                                                         (149)
                                                                    k=1

      Statement 3: For an arbitrary node vb ,
                                      q         p     q
                                         ∆Rx
                                           b  ≤  θN +  ∆Tx
                                                        b ,                                                                  (150)

where limN →∞ θN = 0.
      1) Proof of Statement 1: For a leaf vl , the random-coding-based estimate is bsl = wl xl , which
is exactly the same as the MMSE estimate bs∗l , since xl is known to vl . Therefore, ∆Tx
                                                                                      l = 0.


     10
          Note that according to the intuitive explanation on test channels (see Remark 4), the estimates based on the Gaussian code
and the MMSE estimations are indeed equal to each other when Gaussian test channels can be physically established.


DRAFT                                                                                                              February 19, 2018
                                                                                                     49


   2) Proof of Statement 2: For a non-leaf node vb and its children, we have that (see (40))
                               d
                               X                       Xd
                         bsb =    ck (Mk→b ) + wb xb =     r b + w b xb .
                                                           b                              (151)
                                 k=1                               k=1
                               d
                               P
Since the partial sum ySb =          ySk + wb xb , we have that
                               k=1
                                             d
                                             X                              d
                                                                            X
                    bs∗b =E [ySb |Ib ] =           E [ySk |Ib ] + wb xb =         r∗k + wb xb .
                                                                                  b               (152)
                                             k=1                            k=1
Thus, combining (151) and (152), we get
                                               d                 d
                                        ∗ 2
                                             X           ∗ 2
                                                               X
                      ∆Tx                                          ∆Rx
                                                 
                       b =     kbsb − bsb k2 =      rk − b
                                                 E kb    rk k2 =    k ,                           (153)
                                                      k=1                         k=1
which can be further relaxed by
                                             q     d q
                                                   X
                                               Tx
                                              ∆b <    ∆Rx
                                                       k .                                        (154)
                                                            k=1
  3) Proof of Statement 3: Note that by (45), we have
                                                         
                                       1                2
                                  E       kbsb − br b k 2 ≤ d b + εN .                       (155)
                                       N
                                 rb ] − bsb k22 . We will prove that Distb is approximately greater
Define Distb = ECb N1 kECb [bsb |b
                                              

than db (the explicit form is in (157)), which means that even the MMSE estimate ECb [bsb |b
                                                                                           rb ]
cannot provide a much better description (in the sense of mean-square error) of bsb than the
                          rb . Notice that the MMSE estimate ECb [bsb |b
typicality-based estimate b                                            rb ] here should be defined
for the chosen codebook Cb at vb , since the receiver va also knows the codebook. The outer E
                             rb ] − bsb k22 is also conditioned on a given codebook Cb at node vb .
in Distb = ECb N1 kECb [bsb |b
                                          

From (37) we have that
               N       b2
                       σ
                  log b + N δN =N Rb
                2      db
                                       (a)
                                       ≥I(bsb ; b
                                                rb )
                                       (b)
                                       ≥I (bsb ; ECb [bsb |b
                                                           rb ])
                                                                                                  (156)
                                       =h(bsb ) − h (bsb |ECb [bsb |b
                                                                    rb ])

                                                                     rb ] |ECb [bsb |b
                                       =h(bsb ) − h (bsb − ECb [bsb |b               rb ])

                                       ≥h(bsb ) − h (bsb − ECb [bsb |b
                                                                     rb ])
                                       (c) N                                N
                                       >                 σb2 − N βN −
                                                 log2 2πeb                    log2 2πeDistb ,
                                             2                              2

February 19, 2018                                                                                 DRAFT
50


where (a) follows from the cut set bound, (b) follows from the data processing inequality, and
(c) follows from Lemma 5. Notice that although the codebook Cb is fixed, other codebooks are
not fixed, so the random vector h(bsb ) still satisfies Lemma 5. Therefore,

                                    Distb > 2−δN −βN db = (1 − N )db ,                                 (157)

where limN →∞ N = 0. Since the inequality (157) holds for any given codebook Cb , (157) also
holds for the entire random codebook ensemble, in which case the outside E is again taken over
the random codebook generation (which is in alignment with the definitions of other mean-square
distortions in other parts of this section and all other sections). Combining (155) and (157) and
the orthogonality principle

                                            rb ] − bsb ) ⊥ (b
                                   (E [bsb |b               rb − E [bsb |b
                                                                         rb ]) ,

we get
                                        
                 1                     2
               E            rb ] − b
                   kE [bsb |b      rb k2 ≤db + εN − (1 − N )db = εN + N db =: θN ,                    (158)
                 N

where limN →∞ θN = 0. Further, we have that

                                                   (a)
                 r∗b = E ySb IPN(b) = E [ySb |b                       rb ] = E [bs∗b |b
                                  
                 b                            rb ] = E [E [ySb |Ib ] |b               rb ] ,            (159)

                                                                                          rb is a
where the equality (a) follows from the iterative expectation principle and the fact that b
function of Ib . Therefore

                                                                     rb ]k22
                                         r∗b k22 = E kE [bsb − bs∗b |b
                                                                          
                                  rb ] − b
                       E kE [bsb |b
                         (a)
                                                                                                        (160)
                                                rb = E kbsb − bs∗b k22 = N ∆Tx
                         ≤ E E kbsb − bs∗b k22 |b
                                                                 
                                                                            b ,

where inequality (a) follows from the Jensen’s inequality. Thus, combining (158) and (160) and
using the triangle inequality, we get
                        s                     
                               1 ∗
               q
                    Rx                       2
                  ∆b = E         kbr −b  rb k2
                               N b
                        s                               s                         
                               1 ∗                    2       1                    2                    (161)
                       ≤ E       kbr − E [bsb |b rb ]k2 + E      rb − E [bsb |b
                                                                kb            rb ]k2
                               N b                            N
                        p        q
                       ≤ θN + ∆Tx     b .



DRAFT                                                                                          February 19, 2018
                                                                                                    51


   4) Using Statement 1-3 to Prove Lemma 6: Using the three statements and using induction
on the tree, we have that
                                      q          q        p
                               sup     ∆Tx
                                        b  ≤ sup   ∆Rx
                                                    b  ≤ n  θN .                                (162)
                              1≤b≤n            1≤b≤n

Thus, the conclusion (48) can be obtained by combining the orthogonality principle
                                                             
          1 ∗       ∗ 2        1 ∗         2       1 ∗          2
      E     kbr − bsb k2 =E       r − ySb k2 − E
                                 kb                  kbs − ySb k2 = DbRx − DbTx                 (163)
          N b                  N b                 N b
and the triangle inequality, which is
  s                     s                       s                 s                 
         1 ∗       ∗  2          1           ∗  2       1        ∗  2       1            2
    E        r − bsb k2 ≤ E
            kb                      kbsb − bsb k2 + E     kb    rb k2 + E
                                                           rb − b              rb − bsb k2
                                                                              kb
        N b                      N                      N                   N
                           p                 p
                         ≤ db + εN + 2n θN ,
                                                                                                (164)
and
  s                s                    s                 s                 
      1 ∗     ∗  2        1          ∗  2       1        ∗  2       1            2
    E   r − bsb k2 ≥ E
       kb                   kbsb − bsb k2 − E      rb − b
                                                  kb    rb k2 − E      rb − bsb k2
                                                                      kb
      N b                N                      N                   N
                     p               p
                    ≥ db − εN − 2n θN .
                                                                                                (165)

G. Proof of Lemma 9

   We use sN ∈ RN to denote one sample of the random vector bsb , and use rN ∈ RN to
denote
   one sample of the codeword (description) b       rb . We will show that the KL-divergence
D pbrb |bsb φN
             VbTC |UbTC
                        is small. We will prove this statement using two steps:
                                                                    
                                N            1               N
  • When the estimate b   sb = s is typical, N D pbrb |bsb φV TC U TC is small.
                                                              b | b
                                                                        
                                N                 1              N
  • When the estimate b   sb = s is not typical, N D pbrb |bsb φV TC U TC is bounded.
                                                                  b | b

Remark 7. These two steps only provide the intuition underlying the two major parts of the
proof. The proof itself is rigorous.

  Denote by TN the set of all N -length sequences sN that is typical with respect to φTC    U .
                                                          
Denote by J2N the set of all 2N -length sequences sN , rN that are jointly typical with respect
to φU TC ,V TC . Denote by TN (sN ) the set of sequences rN that are jointly typical with the typical
sequence sN . Notice that we define typical sets as the distortion typical set (weak typical set with

February 19, 2018                                                                               DRAFT
52


Euclidean distortion) in [15, Sec. 10.5]. Denote by B(xN , v) the N -dimensional ball centered at
xN and with volume v. We simplify notation and omit the subscripts of all pdfs and use notation
p(·) and q(·) to respectively denote typical-codes-based pdfs and test-channel-based pdfs. Note
that the support set of the N -fold product pdf φN
                                                 VbTC |UbTC
                                                            is the entire RN and it has no singular
point and it does not vanish everywhere. Therefore, the ratio p(·)q(·)
                                                                       is always properly defined11 .

      1) Proof of the first statement: when the estimate (source) sN is a typical sequence, i.e., when
sN ∈ TN ,




                                                                                                   
                                                                                        p r N sN
                                                                 Z
                        N       N             N       N                   N    N
                                                                                                     drN
                                                                                
                D p r       s           q r       s            =      p r s log             N    N
                                                                  RN                    q (r |s )
                                                                                                       
                                                                                            p r N sN
                                                                 Z
                                                                               N    N
                                                                                                         drN
                                                                                      
                                                               =            p r s log            N   N
                                                                                                                            (166)
                                                                  TN (sN )                  q (r |s )
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                   p r N sN
                                                                    Z
                                                                                      N    N
                                                                                                               drN .
                                                                                             
                                                                 +                 p r s log           N   N
                                                                     RN \TN (sN )                 q (r |s )




                                                               
We look at the first term on the RHS of (166). When rN ∈ TN sN , since the sent codeword
rb is chosen to be an arbitrary codeword in Cb \ {cb (0)} that is jointly typical with bsb (see
b
Section IV-B), there are two possible cases when the sent codeword is close12 to rN : there
is at least one codeword in Cb \ {cb (0)} that is within the ball B(rN , v), or no codeword in
Cb \ {cb (0)} is within B(rN , v) but the codeword {cb (0)} (which is only sent when an error




     11
          Here, ‘properly defined’ means that 00 or ∞
                                                    ∞
                                                      will not happen. This property only requires that the N -fold product pdf
φN
 V TC |U TC
            is properly defined. In fact, based on the randomness of the generation of the codewords, it may be possible to prove
     b      b
a stronger result that the pdf pbrb |bsb does not have any singular point as well.
     12
          Since we compute the pdf in a continuous space, we have to compute the probability that the sent codeword is close to rN
and then compute the limit when the “distance” approaches zero (see limv→0 in (167)).


DRAFT                                                                                                              February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                               53

                                                         
happens) is within B(rN , v). Therefore, when rN ∈ TN sN , we have that


                                           1
                            p rN sN = lim Pr brb ∈ B(rN , v) bsb = sN
                                                                     
                                       v→0 v
                                           1
                                     < lim Pr ∃cN ∈ Cb \ {cb (0)},
                                       v→0 v

                                                        s.t. cN ∈ B(rN , v) bsb = sN
                                                                                     

                                                 1
                                           + lim Pr cb (0) ∈ B(rN , v) bsb = sN
                                                                                    
                                             v→0 v
                                                                                                                          (167)
                                                 1n               N
                                                                      2N Rb         N
                                                                                         o
                                           = lim       1− 1−q r v               +q r v
                                             v→0 v
                                                 1
                                                      q rN 2N Rb v + o(v) + q rN v
                                                                                   
                                           = lim
                                             v→0 v

                                           = 2N Rb + 1 q rN
                                                                

                                           < 2N Rb +1 q rN .
                                                             



Here the conditional probability is also defined in the sense of regular conditional probability.
                                            
Also notice that in this case, since sN , rN ∈ J2N , due to the weak typicality, we have13



                                    2−N (h(Vb )+εN ) ≤ q rN ≤ 2−N (h(Vb )−εN ) ,
                                             TC                       TC
                                                                                                                          (168)




                                    2−N (h(Ub )+εN ) ≤ q sN ≤ 2−N (h(Ub )−εN ) ,
                                            TC                       TC
                                                                                                                          (169)




                             2−N (h(Ub ,Vb )+εN ) ≤ q sN , rN ≤ 2−N (h(Ub ,Vb )−εN ) ,
                                     TC   TC                           TC   TC
                                                                                                                          (170)




  13
       Notice that this typicality is defined for random variables with continuous alphabets, the details of which are provided in
[15, Sec. 8.2].


February 19, 2018                                                                                                         DRAFT
54


where limN →∞ εN = 0. Therefore,
                                                                                      
                       p r N sN                                       2N Rb +1 q rN
  Z                                        Z
                                       (a)
                N N                  N                     N   N
                                                                                         drN
                                                                
             p r s log     N   N
                                   dr <                p r s log             N    N
   TN (sN )           q (r |s )             TN (sN )                  q (r |s )
                                                                       N Rb +1       N
                                                                                            N
                                                                                               
                                                                      2        q   r     q s
                                           Z
                                                       p rN sN log                               drN
                                                                 
                                        =                                         N , rN )
                                               N   N
                                             T (s )                         q (s
                                                                                     
                                       (b)               1         TC   TC
                                                                           
                                       <N Rb +              − I Ub ; Vb + 3εN
                                                        N
                                             Z
                                                        p rN sN drN
                                                                   
                                           ·
                                                   T N (sN )
                                                                       
                                                     1      TC    TC
                                                                     
                                             <N Rb +   − I Ub ; Vb + 3εN
                                                     N
                                                           
                                             (c)     1
                                             =N δN +   + 3εN ,
                                                     N
                                                                                                   (171)
where step (a) follows from (167), step (b) holds because when rN ∈ TN (sN ), (168)-(170) hold,
and because
                                    2N Rb +1 2−N (h(Vb )−εN ) 2−N (h(Ub )−εN )
                                                    TC               TC
         2N Rb +1 q rN q sN
     log                      ≤ log
               q (sN , rN )                    2−N (h(Ub ,Vb )+εN )
                                                         TC TC



                              =N Rb + 1 − N h VbTC + h UbTC − h UbTC , VbTC − 3εN
                                                                               
                                                                                    (172)
                                                       TC   TC
                                                                       
                              =N Rb + 1 − N I Ub ; Vb − 3εN
                                                                       
                                           1           TC   TC
                                                               
                              =N Rb +          − I Ub ; Vb + 3εN ,
                                           N
and δN in step (c) is defined in (37), which says that Rb = I(UbTC ; VbTC ) + δN .
   Then, we look at the second term on the RHS of (166). When the estimate (source) sN is a
                                  
typical sequence but rN ∈/ TN sN , we have that

      p r N sN
               

  (a)      1
  = lim Pr no codeword ∈ Cb \ {cb (0)} is jointly typical with sN · Pr cb (0) ∈ B(rN , v)
                                                                                         
      v→0 v
                                                                     1
   = Pr no codeword ∈ Cb \ {cb (0)} is jointly typical with sN · lim Pr cb (0) ∈ B(rN , v)
                                                                                         
                                                                 v→0 v

   = Pr no codeword ∈ Cb \ {cb (0)} is jointly typical with sN · q rN ,
                                                                      

                                                                                                   (173)
                                                                               
                                                              / TN s
where (a) holds because the only case to obtain a codeword rN ∈              N
                                                                                   is when no codeword
in the code Cb \ {cb (0)} = {cb (w) : w ∈ {1, 2, . . . 2N Ri }} is rN but the first codeword cb (0)

DRAFT                                                                                     February 19, 2018
                                                                                                      55


(only sent when an encoding error happens) is rN . Define

            λb,N = Pr no codeword ∈ Cb \ {cb (0)} is jointly typical with sN .
                                                                            
                                                                               (174)
                                       
Then, we have that p rN sN = λb,N q rN . From the covering lemma (see Lemma 3), we
have that lim λb,N = 0. Then, the second term on the RHS of (166) can be upper-bounded by
            N →∞
                                                                                       
                           p r N sN                                         λb,N q rN
  Z                                            Z
                    N N                  N                            N
                                                                                          drN
                                                                       
                 p r s log     N   N
                                       dr =                   λb,N q r log       N    N
   RN \TN (sN )           q (r |s )            RN \TN (sN )               q (r |s )
                                                                                    N
                                                                                      
                                                                              q   r
                                               Z
                                           (a)
                                                              λb,N q rN log              drN (175)
                                                                        
                                           <
                                                RN \TN (sN )               q (rN |sN )
                                                                                    N
                                                                                      
                                                                              q   r
                                                   Z
                                                                   q rN log              drN ,
                                                                        
                                            =λb,N                                N |sN )
                                                       N    N
                                                     R \T (s )N            q (r
where step (a) holds because λb,N < 1. We respectively bound the above integral within two
integral regions. First, we notice that
                                                                             
                         q rN                                   q r N q sN
   Z                                      Z
               N                      N                 N
                                                                                 drN
                                                         
            q r log         N |sN )
                                    dr =             q r log          N , rN )
      N  N
    T (s )            q (r                  N   N
                                           T (s )               q (s
                                                                2−N (h(Vb )+εN ) 2−N (h(Ub )+εN ) N
                                          Z                               TC              TC
                                                        N
                                                          
                                        ≥            q r log                                     dr
                                                                      2−N (h(Ub ,Vb )−εN )
                                                                                 TC  TC
                                           TN (sN )
                                                                           Z
                                                       TC   TC
                                                                                    q rN drN
                                                                                      
                                        = − N I Vb ; Ub + 3εN
                                                                             TN (sN )

                                       > − N I VbTC ; Ub + 3εN TC
                                                                        

                                                    bb2
                                                                 
                                              1     σ
                                       =−N      log     + δN + 3εN .
                                              2     db
                                                                                                (176)
Then, we notice that
                         
                   q rN
  Z
          N                     N        N       N   N
                                                     
      q r log                dr   =D q r     q r   s
   RN            q (rN |sN )
                                       N
                                   (a) X
                                   =         D (q (ri ) kq (ri |si ))
                                       i=1
                                       N                      2               
                                       X
                                                   2
                                                                bb si
                                                                 σ           db
                                   =             σ b − db ) N
                                         D N 0, (b                      , 1 − 2 db
                                     i=1
                                                               bb2 − db
                                                               σ             σ
                                                                             bb
                                       N
                                   (b) X                                          2
                                   =         cb,1 + cb,2 si 2 = cb,1 N + cb,2 sN 2 ,
                                       i=1
                                                                                                (177)

February 19, 2018                                                                               DRAFT
56


where (a) holds because the typicality-based pdf q(·) can be decomposed into the product
of N identical pdfs such that each identical pdf corresponds to the pdf of each entry of the
corresponding N -length vector, and (b) follows from the formula of KL-divergence between
two Gaussian random variables (see (72)):
                                             2                 
                                    2
                                                 bb si
                                                  σ           db
              D N 0, (1 − db )b    σb N                  , 1 − 2 db
                                                bb2 − db
                                                σ             σ
                                                              bb
                                                                                     2
                       σb2 − db )
                  bb2 (b                     σb2 − db )
                                        bb2 (b
                                                                        
                  σ                     σ                      1             si
            = log                 −1+                    +
                  db (bσb2 − db )       db (b                    σb2 )db 1 − db /b
                                             σb2 − db ) (1 − db /b               σb2
                                                                                                                 (178)
                      b2
                      σ       b2
                              σ          s2i
                 = log b − 1 + b +
                      db      db   (1 − db /bσb2 )3 db
                   N
                   X
             =:               cb,1 + cb,2 s2i .
                      i=1

Thus, combining (175)-(177), we have that, the second term on the RHS of (166) can be upper-
bounded by
                                                             
                                                   p r N sN
                          Z
                                                      N    N
                                                               drN
                                                               
                                         p r s log     N  N
                           RN \TN (sN )           q (r |s )
                                                                                                                 (179)
                                                                bb2
                                                                             
                                               N 2        1     σ
                          ≤λb,N cb,1 N + cb,2 s 2 + N       log     + δN + 3εN    ,
                                                          2      db
where the inequality follows by adding up the RHSs of (176) and (177). Also note that cb,2 ≥ 0
(otherwise we can upper-bound cb,2 with max(0, cb,2 )). Therefore, combining (171) and (179),
we get that, when sN ∈ TN ,
                                                                          
             N        N
                                    N       N
                                                               1                 
                                                                                                N 2
                                                                                                    
     D p r        s            q r       s            <N δN +       + 3εN + λb,N cb,1 N + cb,2 s 2
                                                                N
                                                                                                                 (180)
                                                                        bb2
                                                                                     
                                                                  1     σ
                                                       + λb,N N     log     + δN + 3εN .
                                                                  2     db
Define

                                                            bb2
                                                                       
                         1                            1     σ
             ζb,N = δN +   + 3εN + λb,N cb,1 + λb,N     log     + δN + 3εN .                                     (181)
                         N                            2     db

Then,
                                                                                                  2
                              D p r N sN                  q r N sN        < ζb,N N + λb,N cb,2 sN 2 ,
                                                                    
                                                                                                                 (182)

where limN →∞ ζb,N = 0, because cb,1 , 21 log d1b < ∞ and δN , N1 , εN , λb,N → 0.

DRAFT                                                                                                   February 19, 2018
                                                                                                57


                                                                                      / TN .
   2) Proof of the second statement: When sN is not a typical sequence, i.e., when sN ∈
In this case,
                                                  p r N sN = q r N ,
                                                                 
                                                                                            (183)

because the encoding automatically fails (even without checking the existence of a codeword)
when the estimate (source) bsb is not typical itself, and we directly send cb (0). Therefore, when
   / TN ,
sN ∈

  D p r N sN            q r N sN        =D q rN q rN sN
                                                       

                                           N                   2                
                                          X
                                                       2
                                                                 bb si
                                                                  σ            db
                                        =            bb − db N
                                              D N 0, σ            2
                                                                          , 1 − 2 db   (184)
                                          i=1
                                                                σ
                                                                bb  − d b      σ
                                                                               bb

                                                                2
                                        =cb,1 N + cb,2 sN 2 .
                                                               2
Here, we only need the fact that cb,1 + cb,2 N1 sN 2 is bounded to complete the remaining proof.
 3)
  Using the two statements
                                  to prove Lemma 9: Finally, we can upper-bound the KL-divergence
D pbrb |bsb φN
             VbTC |UbTC
                           using the following integral:
                            Z
                  N
                                     p sN D p rN sN q rN sN dsN
                                                                   
  D pbrb |bsb φV TC |U TC =
                    b    b         N
                                RZ          Z 
                                                   p sN D p rN sN q rN sN dsN
                                                                                 
                              =           +
                                        RN \TN        TN
                                   Z
                                                       h                 2
                                                                            i
                              <                 p sN     cb,1 N + cb,2 sN 2 dsN
                                    RN \TN
                                        Z
                                                  h
                                                   N                    N 2
                                                                            i
                                   +          p s   ζb,N N + λb,N cb,2 s 2 dsN
                                        TN                                                 (185)
                                   Z
                                                    h                2
                                                                        i
                              <                 p sN cb,1 N + cb,2 sN 2 dsN
                                    RN \TN
                                        Z
                                            h                       2
                                                                       i
                                   +           ζb,N N + λb,N cb,2 sN 2 dsN
                                              p sN
                                     RN
                                                                 Z
                                              N                                2
                                                                       p sN sN 2 dsN
                                                                         
                                   = 1 − Pr T     cb,1 N + cb,2
                                                                          RN \TN

                                   + ζb,N N + λb,N cb,2 E kbsb k22 ,
                                                                 

                               N →∞
where 1 − Pr TN , λb,N , ζb,N −−−→ 0, and N1 E kbsb k22 < ∞ (see (43)). Therefore, to prove
                                                      

that
                                            1             N
                                                                     
                                              D pbrb |bsb φV TC |U TC < ηeb,N ,             (186)
                                            N               b     b



February 19, 2018                                                                           DRAFT
58


for some constant ηeb,N such that limN →∞ ηeb,N → 0, we only need to show that
                                     Z
                                   1                     2
                                              p sN sN 2 dsN = 0.
                                                  
                             lim                                                                   (187)
                            N →∞ N RN \T N
                                          

Note that based on the induction in (109), we already know that (recall that El = 1 means that
the encoding at node vl is not successful)

                            αlN N > Pr(El = 1)E kbsl k22 El = 1
                                                              
                                    ZZ
                                                            2
                                              p sN sN 2 dsN drN
                                                   
                                  =
                                             R2N \J2N
                                  (a)
                                        Z                 Z
                                                                                  2
                                                                                                   (188)
                                                      N
                                                                    p sN       sN 2 dsN
                                                                           
                                  >              dr
                                            RN            RN \TN
                                        Z
                                                                      2
                                                      p sN        sN 2 dsN ,
                                                              
                                   =
                                        RN \TN
                                                                                               
where step (a) follows from the fact that when sN is not typical, the pair sN , rN                 is not
jointly-typical, which means that integral region R2N \J2N (the pair is not typical) contains the
                 
region RN \TN × RN (sN is not typical). Therefore, we conclude that
                                 1                        
                                   D pbrb |bsb φN
                                                VbTC |UbTC
                                                             < ηeb,N ,                       (189)
                                N
for some constant ηeb,N → 0.


                                                  A PPENDIX D
                                        P ROOFS FOR S ECTION V

A. Proof of Theorem 5

     We consider a general case in Fig. 1, where the set S represents Sb→a . Using exactly the same
arguments from (73) to (76), we obtain

                               bSmmse     bSmmse        bSmmse
                                                                        
                               y  b→a ,b
                                         −y  b→a ,a
                                                      ⊥ y  b→a ,b
                                                                  − ySb→a .                        (190)

Therefore, using Pythagoras theorem, we get

                                             Rx     Tx     Inc
                                            Di→j = Di→j + Di→j .                                   (191)

From the definition of an MMSE estimate, we have that
                                       " d                  #  d
                                        X                      X
            mmse
          bSb→a ,b =E [ySb→a |Ib ] = E
          y                                ySk→b + wb xb |Ib =   bSmmse
                                                                 y  k→b ,b
                                                                           + w b xb .              (192)
                                                 k=1                              k=1


DRAFT                                                                                     February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                             59


Therefore

                    h                       i       d         h                             i       d
       Tx
                                       2           X                                  2           X
      Db→a =E                bSmmse
                        yS − y  b→a ,b
                                                =         E                  bSmmse
                                                                  ySk→b ,b − y  k→b ,b
                                                                                                =          Rx
                                                                                                          Dk→b    Inc
                                                                                                               + Dk→b .   (193)
                                                    k=1                                             k=1

                                −
                                →
Using induction on the edge set T k of the directed tree towards the root vk , we get (64).



B. Proof of Theorem 6

   The main part is to show that in Fig. 1

                                           1    σS2 b→a       Tx
                                                                  )1/2 ,
                                                                      
                                     Rb→a ≥ log2 Inc    − O (Db→a                                                         (194)
                                           2    Db→a

which is a counterpart of (91). As long as (194) holds, the outer bound in Theorem 6 can be
obtained by summing (194) over all links.
   The proof of (194) can be obtained similarly as in the proof of (91). We know that the set S
in Fig. 1 represents Sb→a ⊂ V. Then, using the same derivations in (82), we get

                                                                           N
                                               ySmmse
                                    N Rb→a ≥ h(b  b→a ,b
                                                         )−                           Inc
                                                                             log2 2πeDb→a .                               (195)
                                                                           2

Using Lemma 2 and the same derivations in (88) and (89), we get

                                                             log2 e h mmse 2                      2
                                                                                                    i
                 ySmmse
               h(b  b→a ,b
                           ) − h(ySb→a ) = −D (p||q) +               E  y Sb→a ,b 2 −   ky      k
                                                                                           Sb→a 2
                                                            2σS2 b→a
                                                                        b
                                                      Tx
                                                                                                                          (196)
                                                   N Db→a   N log2 e
                                                                     q                               
                                                ≥−     2
                                                          −     2
                                                                          Tx
                                                                       2Db→a     4σS2 b→a + Db→a
                                                                                               Tx
                                                                                                       ,
                                                    2wb     2σSb→a

                                    bSmmse
where p(·) and q(·) are the pdfs of y  b→a ,b
                                              and ySb→a respectively. Combining (195), (196) and
the fact that h(yS ) = 12 log2 2πeσS2 , we get

                          1    σS2 b→a  Tx
                                       Db→a    log2 e
                                                       q
                                                           Tx    2        Tx
                                                                             
                    Rb→a ≥ log2 Inc −       −           2Db→a 4σ Sb→a + Db→a
                          2    Db→a    2wb2   2σS2 b→a
                                                                                                                          (197)
                             1    σS2 b→a       Tx
                                                    )1/2 .
                                                        
                            = log2 Inc    − O (Db→a
                             2    Db→a

This completes the proof.

February 19, 2018                                                                                                         DRAFT
60


C. Proof of Theorem 7

     In this proof, we provide an achievable scheme for the Gaussian network consensus problem.
We basically generalize the scheme for linear function computation in Section IV to the network
consensus problem. Therefore, we will first use Gaussian test channels to define some distribution
functions that we will use in this section. Then, we will provide the encoding and decoding
procedures for the Gaussian random codes. Finally, we will prove that this scheme achieves the
sum rate inner bound (67).
     Recall that at each node vi , ySi→j denotes the partial weighted sum of all data at all descendants
of vi when the node vj is viewed as the parent node of vi . Denote by bsi→j the estimate of the
                              ri→j the description of bsi→j that is sent by vi to vj . The formal
partial sum ySi→j . Denote by b
definition of the estimates and descriptions will be provided in the encoding and decoding
procedures. Following the same procedures in Section IV, we first define some distribution
functions using Gaussian test channels. These distribution functions will be defined such that
                                     ri→j are typical with respect to them.
the estimates bsi→j and descriptions b
                                                                   TC        TC            2
     At each link vi → vj , we define two scalar random variables Ui→j and Vi→j . Define σ
                                                                                         bi→j as
                 TC          TC              TC
the variance of Ui→j . When Ui→j is given, Vi→j is defined by the Gaussian test channel
                                           TC      TC
                                          Ui→j = Vi→j + Zi→j ,                                     (198)
                                              TC
where Zi→j ∼ N (0, di→j ) is independent of Vi→j and di→j is the distortion parameter, which
can be tuned.
     For any arbitrary leaf vl , define
                                               TC
                                              Ul→n(l) = wl Xl ,                                    (199)

where Xl denotes a random variable that has the same distribution as each entry of xl , and vn(l)
denotes the only neighbor of the node vl . For an arbitrary non-leaf node vb and an arbitrary
neighbor va ∈ N (vb ) as shown in Fig. 1, define
                                           X
                                TC                                 TC
                              Ub→a  =                            Vk→b + w b Xb ,                   (200)
                                             vk ∈N (vb )\{va }
where Xb denotes a random variable that has the same distribution as each entry of xb . Since
                                          TC
the network is a tree, all descriptions Vk→b at different neighbors vk of vb are independent of
each other. Therefore,
                                             d
                                             X
                                      2                2
                                    σ
                                    bb→a =           σk→b
                                                    (b    − dk→b ) + wb2 .                         (201)
                                              k=1


DRAFT                                                                                     February 19, 2018
                                                                                                        61


                                                     TC        TC
Define φUi→j
         TC  and φVi→j
                    TC as distribution functions of Ui→j and Vi→j . We also use joint pdfs,
where the meanings are always clear from the context. Note that Gaussian test channels and the
calculations in (199) and (200) are all linear. Therefore, all pdfs φUi→j
                                                                      TC  and φVi→j
                                                                                 TC are Gaussian.
Moreover, the pdfs φUi→j
                     TC  and φVi→j
                                TC are tunable by changing the normalized distortions di→j .
                               TC
Remark 8. The random variable Ui→j can be viewed intuitively as the estimate at the node vi
                                                                                            TC
of the partial weighted sum ySi→j when test-channels can be physically established, while Vi→j
                                     TC
can be viewed as the description of Ui→j .

   Before the computation starts, each node vi generates d(vi ) random codebooks Ci→j = {ci→j (w) :
w ∈ {0, 1, . . . 2N Ri→j }}, ∀j s.t. vj ∈ N (vi ), where each codeword is generated i.i.d. according
to distribution φVi→j
                   TC . The rate is chosen such that

                                                                          2
                                    TC      TC         1                σ
                                                                        bi→j
                          Ri→j = I(Ui→j ; Vi→j ) + δN = log                  + δN ,                 (202)
                                                              2         di→j
       TC        TC
where Ui→j and Vi→j are respectively the ‘estimate’ scalar random variable and the ‘description’
scalar random variable, and lim δN = 0. Thus, the formula of the sum rate R in (61) can be
                                N →∞
proved by summing up the rates on all links in the network.
   The codebook Ci→j is revealed to the node vj . During the computation, as shown in Fig 1,
each node vb , upon receiving description indexes M1b , M2b , . . . Mdb from the d neighbors v1 , . . . vd
except the neighbor va , decodes these descriptions, computes the sum of them and the data vector
generated at vb
                                            d
                                            X
                                  bsb→a =         ck→b (Mk→b ) + wb xb ,                            (203)
                                            k=1

and re-encodes bsb→a into a new description index Mb→a ∈ {1, 2, . . . 2N Rb→a } and sends the
description index to the neighbor va with N Rb→a bits. We denote the reconstructed description
   rb→a = cb→a (Mb→a ). The decoding and encoding at the node vb are defined as follows.
by b
   •   Decoding: In each codebook Ck→b , ∀k s.t. vk ∈ N (vb ), use the codeword ck→b (Mk→b ) as
                       rk→b . If vb has obtained all descriptions from all neighbors, it computes the
       the description b
       sum of all descriptions and its own data as the estimate of y:
                                              X
                                        bb =
                                        y            rk→b + wb xb .
                                                     b                                              (204)
                                               vk ∈N (vb )

   •   Encoding: For each neighbor va ∈ N (vb ), find the codeword cb→a (Mb→a ) ∈ Cb→a \
                                                       d
                                                       P
       {cb→a (0)} such that the two sequences bsb→a =                              rb→a =
                                                          ck→b (Mk→b ) + wb xb and b
                                                                  k=1


February 19, 2018                                                                                   DRAFT
62


     cb→a (Mb→a ) are jointly typical with respect to the distribution φUb→a
                                                                         TC ,V TC . If there are more
                                                                              b→a

     than one codewords that satisfy this condition, arbitrarily choose one of them. However,
     if bsb→a is not typical with respect to the distribution φUb→a
                                                                TC , or if there is no codeword


     in Cb→a \ {cb→a (0)} that satisfies the joint typicality condition, send description index
     Mb→a = 0.
Similar to the linear function computation case, the encoding step for network consensus may
                                   d
                                   P
fail, because the estimate bsb→a =   ck→b (Mk→b )+wb xb may not be a typical sequence respect to
                                   k=1
      TC , or there may not exist codewords in Cb→a that satisfy the typicality requirement. In this
pdf φUb→a
case, the description index Mb→a = 0 is sent and this description is decoded to a predetermined
random sequence cb→a (0) on the receiver side.

Lemma 11 (Covering Lemma for Network Consensus). Denote by Ei→j = 1 the event that the
encoding of the estimate bsi→j at the node vi is not successful. Then

                                    lim sup Pr(Ei→j = 1) = 0,                                      (205)
                                   N →∞ (i,j)∈E


where E denotes all links in the tree network G = (V.E) ((i, j) and (j, i) are viewed as two
links in the undirected graph G), and the probability is taken over random data sampling and
random codebook generation.

     Proof: The proof of this lemma is almost the same as the proof for linear function computing
case (see Appendix C-C). This is because the distributed computation algorithm used in this
section can be viewed as a group of n = |V| linear function computations in n different directed
trees T~k , 1 ≤ k ≤ n towards n different roots (see definition of T~k below equation (63)).
Therefore, we can use the conditional typicality lemma and mathematical induction on each
directed tree to obtain the conclusion.

Remark 9. The proofs for network consensus are also based on the induction on the tree (see
Remark 1), except that we may often want to prove that some property P holds at all links
vb → va in the tree network. Firstly, we prove that P holds for all links vl → vn (l), where vl
is a leaf and vn(l) is the only neighbor of vl . Secondly, we prove that, for an arbitrary node vb
with d + 1 neighbors, denoted by v1 , v2 , . . . vd and a special neighbor va , if P holds for all links
v1 → vb , v2 → vb , . . . vd → vb , then the property holds for the link vb → va . It is obvious that
these two arguments lead to the conclusion that P holds for all links in the tree network.

DRAFT                                                                                     February 19, 2018
                                                                                               63


                                                               rb→a are jointly typical with high
   Lemma 11 states that the estimate bsb→a and the description b
probability for all links vb → va in the tree network. The following Lemma 12 and Lemma 13
are counterparts of Lemma 4 and Lemma 5 in the linear function computation problem.

Lemma 12. For an arbitrary link vb → va , the description b
                                                          rb→a = cb→a (Mba ) and the estimate
bsb→a satisfy                                    
                                      1         2     2
                                    E   kbsb→a k2 − σ
                                                    bb→a < εN ,                            (206)
                                      N

                                         
                               1        2      2
                             E    rb→a k2 − (b
                                 kb          σb→a − db→a ) < εN ,                          (207)
                               N

                                                  
                                1                2
                              E    rb→a − bsb→a k2 − db→a < εN ,
                                  kb                                                       (208)
                                N
where limN →∞ εN = 0.

      Proof: Similar with the proof of Lemma 11, the proof of this lemma can be derived similarly
as the proof for the linear function computation case (see Appendix C-D), because the proof
for the linear function computation case is mathematical induction in the tree network, while
the network consensus computation scheme in this section can be viewed as a group of linear
function computations on n different directed trees.

Lemma 13. For an arbitrary link vb → va , the description b
                                                          rb→a = cb→a (Mba ) and the estimate
bsb→a satisfy
                                             N           2
                               h(bsb→a ) >     log2 2πeb
                                                       σb→a − N βN ,                       (209)
                                             2

                                         N            2
                          h(b
                            rb→a ) >       log2 2πe(b
                                                    σb→a − db→a ) − N βN ,                 (210)
                                         2
where limN →∞ βN = 0.

      Proof: One can use the same argument as the one used in the proof of Lemma 12.
   The following lemma characterizes the relationship between the Gaussian-code-based distor-
                                                                 Tx
tion di→j (normalized distortion) and the MMSE-based distortion Di→j for the Gaussian code.

Lemma 14. For an arbitrary link vi → vj
                    p                q             p
                                       Rx     Tx
                     di→j − εN − ηN ≤ Di→j − Di→j ≤ di→j + εN + ηN ,                       (211)

February 19, 2018                                                                          DRAFT
64


where lim ηN = 0 and εN is the same as in (208).
         N →∞

       Proof: The proof of this lemma essentially follows the same procedures with the ones in
the proof for linear function computation in the Appendix C-F. We only provide the sketch of
the proof. First, define

                                          bs∗i→j = y
                                                   bSmmse
                                                      i→j ,i
                                                             ,                                  (212)

                                          r∗i→j = y
                                          b       bSmmse
                                                     i→j ,j
                                                            .                                   (213)

                                                                                            r∗i→j
Therefore, bs∗i→j is the MMSE estimate of the partial weighted sum ySi→j at node vi , while b
is the MMSE estimate of the same weighted sum at node vj . Define
                                                           
                               Tx       1             ∗   2
                             ∆i→j = E       bsi→j − bsi→j 2 ,                                   (214)
                                        N
                                                           
                               Rx       1             ∗   2
                             ∆i→j = E       bri→j − bri→j 2 .                                   (215)
                                        N
We will prove that ∆Tx           Rx
                    i→j → 0 and ∆i→j → 0 when N → ∞.

     Using the same derivations with equation (151) to (153), we get
                                                   d
                                                   X
                                        ∆Tx
                                         b→a =           ∆Rx
                                                          k→b ,                                 (216)
                                                   k=1

for an arbitrary link vb → va and the neighborhood structure N (vb ) = {v1 , . . . vd } ∪ {va } (see
Figure 1). Using the same derivations with equation (155) to (161), we get
                                 q          p       q
                                     Rx
                                   ∆b→a ≤ θN + ∆Tx      b→a ,                                   (217)

for an arbitrary link vb → va and the constant limN →∞ θN = 0. Using induction on n different
directed tree networks, we get
                                  q           q        p
                                    Tx
                              sup  ∆i→j ≤ sup  ∆Rx
                                                i→j ≤ n  θN .                                   (218)
                             (i,j)∈E           (i,j)∈E

Using the triangle inequality, we get
                      s                       
                             1 ∗         ∗   2   p             p
                        E       ri→j − bsi→j 2 ≤ di→j + εN + 2n θN ,
                                b                                                               (219)
                            N
and                    s                   
                           1 ∗        ∗   2   p             p
                        E    ri→j − bsi→j 2 ≥ di→j − εN − 2n θN ,
                             b                                                                  (220)
                           N
which conclude the proof.

DRAFT                                                                                  February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                            65


   Using the same procedures from (50) to (55), one can prove that the overall distortion at one
node, averaged over the random code ensemble satisfies
                                          X
                                DiTotal ≤      di→j + N .                                                             (221)
                                                               →
                                                               −
                                                         (i,j)∈ T k

Summing the above equations over all directed trees in the network, we have that (68) holds for
the overall distortion averaged over the random code ensemble. Therefore, we can at least find
one code for which (68) holds.

                                                      R EFERENCES
 [1] Y. Polyanskiy and Y. Wu, “Dissipation of information in channels with input constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Information
     Theory, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 35–55, 2016.
 [2] F. Calmon, Y. Polyanskiy, and Y. Wu, “Strong data processing inequalities in power-constrained Gaussian channels,” in
     Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2015.
 [3] V. Anantharam, A. Gohari, S. Kamath, and C. Nair, “On hypercontractivity and a data processing inequality,” in Proceedings
     of the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 3022–3026, June 2014.
 [4] W. Evans and L. Schulman, “Signal propagation and noisy circuits,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45,
     pp. 2367–2373, Nov 1999.
 [5] M. Raginsky, “Strong data processing inequalities and φ-sobolev inequalities for discrete channels,” IEEE Transactions on
     Information Theory, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3355–3389, 2016.
 [6] E. Erkip and T. Cover, “The efficiency of investment information,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 44,
     pp. 1026–1040, May 1998.
 [7] A. Avestimehr, S. Diggavi, and D. Tse, “Wireless network information flow: A deterministic approach,” IEEE Transactions
     on Information Theory, vol. 57, pp. 1872–1905, April 2011.
 [8] Y. Yang, P. Grover, and S. Kar, “Can a noisy encoder be used to communicate reliably?,” in Proceedings of the 52nd
     Allerton Conference on Control, Communication and Computing, pp. 659–666, Sept 2014.
 [9] Y. Yang, P. Grover, and S. Kar, “Computing linear transformations with unreliable components,” arXiv:1506.07234, 2015.
[10] P. Cuff, H.-I. Su, and A. El Gamal, “Cascade multiterminal source coding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
     Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 1199–1203, June 2009.
[11] H.-I. Su and A. El Gamal, “Distributed lossy averaging,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, pp. 3422–3437,
     July 2010.
[12] M. Raginsky and I. Sason, Concentration of Measure Inequalities in Information Theory, Communications, and Coding,
     2nd ed. Boston, MA USA: Now Publishers Inc., 2014.
[13] Y. Wu, “On the HWI inequality.” A work in progress.
[14] F. Otto and C. Villani, “Generalization of an inequality by Talagrand and links with the logarithmic Sobolev inequality,”
     Journal of Functional Analysis, vol. 173, no. 2, pp. 361–400, 2000.
[15] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd Edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[16] A. Giridhar and P. Kumar, “Toward a theory of in-network computation in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Communications
     Magazine, vol. 44, pp. 98–107, April 2006.


February 19, 2018                                                                                                      DRAFT
66


[17] A. Dimakis, S. Kar, J. Moura, M. Rabbat, and A. Scaglione, “Gossip algorithms for distributed signal processing,”
     Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 98, pp. 1847–1864, Nov 2010.
[18] D. Krithivasan and S. Pradhan, “Lattices for distributed source coding: Jointly Gaussian sources and reconstruction of a
     linear function,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 55, pp. 5628–5651, Dec 2009.
[19] A. Wagner, S. Tavildar, and P. Viswanath, “Rate region of the quadratic Gaussian two-encoder source-coding problem,”
     IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 54, pp. 1938–1961, May 2008.
[20] A. Wagner, “On distributed compression of linear functions,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, pp. 79–94,
     Jan 2011.
[21] R. Soundararajan and S. Vishwanath, “Communicating linear functions of correlated Gaussian sources over a MAC,” IEEE
     Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 58, pp. 1853–1860, March 2012.
[22] M. Sefidgaran and A. Tchamkerten, “On cooperation in multi-terminal computation and rate distortion,” in Proceedings
     of the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 766–770, July 2012.
[23] Y. Song and N. Devroye, “Lattice codes for the Gaussian relay channel: Decode-and-forward and compress-and-forward,”
     IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 4927–4948, 2013.
[24] R. Appuswamy, M. Franceschetti, N. Karamchandani, and K. Zeger, “Network coding for computing: Cut-set bounds,”
     IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 1015–1030, 2011.
[25] K. Viswanathan, “On the memory required to compute functions of streaming data,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
     International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 196–200, June 2010.
[26] M. Sefidgaran and A. Tchamkerten, “Distributed function computation over a tree network,” in Proceedings of Information
     Theory Workshop (ITW), pp. 1–5, Sept 2013.
[27] V. Misra and K. Viswanathan, “Sequential functional quantization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium
     on Information Theory, pp. 2359–2363, July 2013.
[28] H. Kowshik and P. Kumar, “Optimal function computation in directed and undirected graphs,” IEEE Transactions on
     Information Theory, vol. 58, pp. 3407–3418, June 2012.
[29] S. Kannan and P. Viswanath, “Multi-session function computation and multicasting in undirected graphs,” IEEE Journal
     on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, pp. 702–713, April 2013.
[30] O. Ayaso, D. Shah, and M. Dahleh, “Information theoretic bounds for distributed computation over networks of point-to-
     point channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, pp. 6020–6039, Dec 2010.
[31] A. Xu and M. Raginsky, “A new information-theoretic lower bound for distributed function computation,” in Proceedings
     of the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 2227–2231, June 2014.
[32] A. E. Gamal and Y.-H. Kim, Network information theory. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[33] I. Shomorony and A. Avestimehr, “A generalized cut-set bound for deterministic multi-flow networks and its applications,”
     in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 271–275, June 2014.
[34] S. Kamath and Y.-H. Kim, “Chop and roll: Improving the cutset bound,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Allerton Conference
     on Control, Communication and Computing, pp. 921–927, Sept 2014.
[35] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, volume 1: Fundamental Algorithms Addison-Wesley. Addison-Wesley
     Professional, 1997.
[36] D. Williams, Probability with martingales. Cambridge university press, 1991.
[37] L. L. Scharf, Statistical signal processing, vol. 98. Addison-Wesley Reading, MA, 1991.
[38] J. Jeon, “A generalized typicality for abstract alphabets,” arXiv:1401.6728v4, 2015.


DRAFT                                                                                                        February 19, 2018
                                                                                                                               67


[39] B. Nazer and M. Gastpar, “Computation over multiple-access channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 53,
     pp. 3498–3516, Oct 2007.
[40] A. Sandryhaila and J. Moura, “Big data analysis with signal processing on graphs: Representation and processing of
     massive data sets with irregular structure,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 31, pp. 80–90, Sept 2014.
[41] Y. Polyanskiy and Y. Wu, “Wasserstein continuity of entropy and outer bounds for interference channels,” IEEE Transactions
     on Information Theory, vol. 62, pp. 3992–4002, July 2016.
[42] J. Duchi, “Derivations for linear algebra and optimization.” http://ai.stanford.edu/∼jduchi/projects/general notes.pdf, 2007.
[43] J. Jeon, “A generalized typicality for abstract alphabets,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on
     Information Theory, pp. 2649–2653, June 2014.
[44] J. Jacod and A. Shiryaev, Limit theorems for stochastic processes, vol. 288. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.




February 19, 2018                                                                                                         DRAFT
