                                                                                                                                       SIAM J. OPTIM.                                      c 2020 Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
                                                                                                                                       Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 1191–1222




                                                                                                                                        DISTRIBUTED ALGORITHMS WITH FINITE DATA RATES THAT
                                                                                                                                                      SOLVE LINEAR EQUATIONS∗
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                              JINLONG LEI† , PENG YI† , GUODONG SHI‡ , AND BRIAN D. O. ANDERSON§

                                                                                                                                           Abstract. In this paper, we study network linear equations subject to digital communications
                                                                                                                                       with a finite data rate, where each node is associated with one equation from a system of linear
                                                                                                                                       equations. Each node holds a dynamic state and interacts with its neighbors through an undirected
                                                                                                                                       connected graph, where along each link the pair of nodes share information. Due to the data rate
                                                                                                                                       constraint, each node builds an encoder/decoder pair, with which it produces transmitted messages
                                                                                                                                       with a zooming-in finite-level uniform quantizer and also generates estimates of its neighbors’ states
                                                                                                                                       from the received signals. We then propose a distributed quantized algorithm and show that when
                                                                                                                                       the network linear equations admit a unique solution, each node’s state is driven to that solution
                                                                                                                                       exponentially fast. We further analyze the asymptotic rate of convergence and show that a larger
                                                                                                                                       number of quantization levels leads to a faster convergence rate although the rate is still fundamen-
                                                                                                                                       tally bounded by the inherent network structure and the linear equations. In addition, we establish
                                                                                                                                       a bound on the total number of communication bits required to obtain a solution with a prescribed
                                                                                                                                       accuracy. When a unique least-squares solution exists, we show that the algorithm can compute such
                                                                                                                                       a solution with a suitably selected time-varying step-size inherited from the encoder and zooming-in
                                                                                                                                       quantizer dynamics. In both cases, a minimal data rate is shown to be enough for guaranteeing the
                                                                                                                                       desired convergence when the algorithm parameters are properly chosen. These results ensure the
                                                                                                                                       applicability of various network linear equation solvers when peer-to-peer communication is digital.

                                                                                                                                           Key words. network linear equations, data rate, quantization, distributed algorithm

                                                                                                                                           AMS subject classifications. 15A06, 90C06, 90C20, 68P30, 68Q87

                                                                                                                                           DOI. 10.1137/19M1258864


                                                                                                                                            1. Introduction. The pursuit of distributed and scalable solutions for control
                                                                                                                                       and optimization problems over large-scale network systems has been one of the cen-
                                                                                                                                       tral themes in the past decades [8, 42]. For a group of interconnected computational
                                                                                                                                       nodes, sensing and decision making can be carried out individually based on the in-
                                                                                                                                       formation flow across the interconnected links, under which collective goals such as
                                                                                                                                       consensus, inference, and estimation can be achieved [4, 8, 46]. Particularly, the clas-
                                                                                                                                       sical distributed optimization framework, introduced in 1980s by the seminal work of
                                                                                                                                       Tsitsiklis, Bertsekas, and Athans [42], has been further developed into a new one where
                                                                                                                                       various new distributed algorithms arise from a lot of problems (cf. [19, 20, 30, 40]).
                                                                                                                                       Solid understandings have been reached on how the underlying network structure
                                                                                                                                       affects the convergence and convergence rates of such algorithms [5, 28, 49]. This
                                                                                                                                       might be the most important feature distinguishing the distributed optimization from

                                                                                                                                          ∗ Received by the editors April 29, 2019; accepted for publication (in revised form) February 12,

                                                                                                                                       2020; published electronically April 28, 2020. A preliminary version of this work was presented in
                                                                                                                                       Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2018.
                                                                                                                                            https://doi.org/10.1137/19M1258864
                                                                                                                                            Funding: The work of the fourth author was supported by the Australian Research Council
                                                                                                                                       (ARC) under grants DP-160104500 and DP19010088 and by Data61-CSIRO.
                                                                                                                                          † Department of Control Science and Engineering, Tongji University, and Shanghai Institute of

                                                                                                                                       Intelligent Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China (leijinlong@tongji.edu.cn,
                                                                                                                                       yipeng@amss.ac.cn, yipeng@tongji.edu.cn).
                                                                                                                                          ‡ Australian Centre for Field Robotics, School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic

                                                                                                                                       Engineering, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia (guodong.shi@sydney.edu.au).
                                                                                                                                          § Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China, and the Research School of Electrical,

                                                                                                                                       Energy and Materials Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia
                                                                                                                                       (brian.anderson@anu.edu.au).
                                                                                                                                                                                       1191




                                                                                                                                            Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1192                 J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                       parallel computation [23, 37] which usually requires a common shared memory and
                                                                                                                                       all-to-all node communication. In big data applications, distributed schemes might
                                                                                                                                       even be the only choice since a single node cannot just store all the data or devote
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       most of the CPU time to I/O operations.
                                                                                                                                            Systems of linear algebraic equations, the solving of which is a primary com-
                                                                                                                                       putation task, arise from diverse engineering problems [7, 11]. Recent research has
                                                                                                                                       focused on the resolution of the linear equations using multiple nodes over a network,
                                                                                                                                       where each node holds one or a few of the linear equations [26]. The network linear
                                                                                                                                       equations also arise from resource allocation problems when node cost functions are
                                                                                                                                       quadratic; see [30, 34]. In the context of parallel computation [14, 23, 37], each node
                                                                                                                                       eventually computes a subset of the entries of the solutions to a linear equation. On
                                                                                                                                       the other hand, motivated by tasks of distributed optimization [18, 24, 30, 31], distrib-
                                                                                                                                       uted algorithms were proposed to compute the entire solution vector at each node. In
                                                                                                                                       particular, discrete-time algorithms are studied by [12, 25, 26, 43], while continuous-
                                                                                                                                       time node dynamics are treated in [1, 38] to solve the network linear equation. In
                                                                                                                                       fact, when exact solutions exist for the linear equations, such first-order distributed
                                                                                                                                       solvers amount to generalized versions of the alternation projection algorithms pio-
                                                                                                                                       neered by von Neumann [31, 39, 44]. When no exact solution exists and one considers
                                                                                                                                       least-squares solutions, properly selected diminishing step-sizes are required [38].
                                                                                                                                            In recent years, considerable efforts have been made on the distributed pro-
                                                                                                                                       tocols with quantized communications, including network control [27], consensus
                                                                                                                                       problems [2, 6, 10, 17, 32], and distributed optimization [21, 35, 47]. There is
                                                                                                                                       also emerging attention from the machine learning and AI communities on inves-
                                                                                                                                       tigating communication-efficient algorithms along with communication complexity
                                                                                                                                       [22, 41, 45, 48] since training with big data inevitably relies on large-scale distrib-
                                                                                                                                       uted computer clusters that only have digital communications over the Ethernet. For
                                                                                                                                       distributed network linear equations with finite data rates, the interplay between the
                                                                                                                                       network structure, the communication capacity, the systems of linear equations, and
                                                                                                                                       the convergence rate is of significant interest. A clear description for that would
                                                                                                                                       enhance the understanding of the distributed computation subject to finite channel
                                                                                                                                       capacity as a whole. On one hand, the algorithms and the resulting convergence
                                                                                                                                       analysis would go far beyond the distributed quantized consensus algorithms [6, 17]
                                                                                                                                       focusing on the task of solving linear algebraic equations. On the other hand, as a
                                                                                                                                       simplified problem with quadratic cost functions among the study on the distributed
                                                                                                                                       quantized optimization [13, 35, 36, 47], the resolution of our results can be pushed to
                                                                                                                                       a much higher level where the connection and distinction between low and high data
                                                                                                                                       rates are clearly revealed. However, such a simplification to quadratic optimization
                                                                                                                                       might also lead to new challenges because (i) the quadratic function associated with
                                                                                                                                       each node is not strongly convex, a condition required by [13, 36]; (ii) gradients of each
                                                                                                                                       node’s objective function cannot be assumed to be globally bounded a priori, which,
                                                                                                                                       however, is a key technical assumption imposed on distributed quantized subgradient
                                                                                                                                       optimization [47].
                                                                                                                                            Among various versions of the network linear equation problem, we consider the
                                                                                                                                       setting where each node holds one equation from a system of linear equations with
                                                                                                                                       m unknown variables. The nodes aim to reach consensus on the solution of the
                                                                                                                                       linear equations. The node interconnection is described by an undirected connected
                                                                                                                                       graph, where along each link the neighboring nodes exchange information constrained
                                                                                                                                       by a limited data rate measured in bits. We propose an encoder/decoder powered
                                                                                                                                       distributed quantized method to solve the network linear equation, motivated by the
                                                                                                                                       quantized consensus protocol proposed in [17]. Each node builds an encoder/decoder




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                          DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                            1193

                                                                                                                                       pair with the help of a zooming-in finite-level uniform quantization function and is
                                                                                                                                       equipped with a dynamical internal encoder state co-evolving with the node states.
                                                                                                                                       At each step, each node’s encoder produces a quantized message with the node state
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       and the current internal encoder state, which will be transmitted to its neighbors
                                                                                                                                       through the digital communication link. After receiving the quantized information
                                                                                                                                       from the neighbors, each node then decodes/estimates its neighbors’ states. Finally,
                                                                                                                                       each node updates its state by a synthesis of a consensus step (using the estimated
                                                                                                                                       neighboring nodes’ states) and a gradient-like step (using its local linear equation).
                                                                                                                                            The key results are summarized as follows:
                                                                                                                                            (i) Exponential rate as an exact solver. When the network linear equation admits
                                                                                                                                       a unique exact solution, we show that the proposed encoder/decoder powered distrib-
                                                                                                                                       uted quantized algorithm drives each node state to that solution asymptotically with
                                                                                                                                       an exponential convergence rate. We further give an explicit form of the asymptotic
                                                                                                                                       rate of convergence, which is related to the scale and the synchronizability of the net-
                                                                                                                                       work, the number of quantization levels, the dimension of the unknown variable, and
                                                                                                                                       the observation matrix. It is shown that a higher convergence rate is possible with
                                                                                                                                       higher data rates but is still fundamentally bounded by the inherent network structure
                                                                                                                                       and the linear equations. Additionally, we establish the communication complexity
                                                                                                                                       in terms of the total number of communication bits required to obtain an -accurate
                                                                                                                                       solution.
                                                                                                                                            (ii) Sublinear rate as a least-squares solver. When the network linear equation
                                                                                                                                       admits a unique least-squares solution, it is shown that the proposed algorithm can
                                                                                                                                       drive the node state to the least-squares solution at a sublinear rate with a decreasing
                                                                                                                                       step-size coming from the dynamics of encoder internal states.
                                                                                                                                            Particularly, it is shown that 1 bit of node-to-node communication along each
                                                                                                                                       dimension of the decision variable for the linear equation is enough to guarantee the
                                                                                                                                       convergence of our proposed algorithm to either exact or least-squares solutions with
                                                                                                                                       suitable parameters. Such convergence with 1-bit communication is unconditional on
                                                                                                                                       the network size or the network structure, which only affects the convergence speeds.
                                                                                                                                            Related works. The authors of [9] studied the distributed parameter estimation
                                                                                                                                       in sensor networks with noisy linear observation models based on the dithered quan-
                                                                                                                                       tization, which indeed added a random dither to the sensor state before quantization
                                                                                                                                       to make the sequence of quantization errors to be an i.i.d. sequence of uniformly
                                                                                                                                       distributed random variables. The recent work [36] considered a distributed strongly
                                                                                                                                       convex optimization based on a random quantizer that is unbiased and has bounded
                                                                                                                                       variance. This makes the quantization error a “white” noise, based on which the
                                                                                                                                       vanishing solution error is proved in a mean-squared sense. Though the exchanged
                                                                                                                                       data in [9, 36] are discrete values, the finiteness of the quantization levels has not been
                                                                                                                                       investigated yet, let alone the minimum quantization level. Compared with [9, 36],
                                                                                                                                       this work proposes a distributed quantized protocol that can achieve exact conver-
                                                                                                                                       gence with a minimum data rate. The work [13] proposed a distributed algorithm
                                                                                                                                       with finite data rate communications to solve distributed strongly convex optimiza-
                                                                                                                                       tion. The exponential convergence to the optimal solution was proved for a sufficiently
                                                                                                                                       large quantization level, but the minimum quantization level is not shown to guar-
                                                                                                                                       antee convergence. In comparison, we establish the low data rate theorem to show
                                                                                                                                       that a minimum quantization level can still guarantee exact convergence, and we fur-
                                                                                                                                       ther explore the influence of the scale and the synchronizability of the network, the
                                                                                                                                       quantization level, and the observation matrix on the exponential factor.
                                                                                                                                            These obtained results serve as assurance for the practical applicability of vari-
                                                                                                                                       ous network linear equation solvers when digital point-to-point communications are




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1194                    J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                       subject to round-up errors. Generalizations of the scenarios where the solutions of
                                                                                                                                       the linear equations are not unique for both exact and least-squares cases are possible
                                                                                                                                       along the same line of analysis but are not included in the current paper for ease of
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       presentation. A preliminary version of the results was presented at the IEEE CDC
                                                                                                                                       in 2018 [16]. The current work compared to [16] makes a number of improvements
                                                                                                                                       and extensions: the major one we would highlight is that we specify how the rate
                                                                                                                                       of convergence is influenced by the quantization levels, the scale and the synchroniz-
                                                                                                                                       ability of the network, the variable dimension m, as well as the problem structure.
                                                                                                                                       In addition, we note in particular that more simulations are carried out to discuss
                                                                                                                                       how data rate influences algorithm parameter selection and, thereby, influences the
                                                                                                                                       converge rate. Furthermore, we compare convergence rates for different types of com-
                                                                                                                                       munication graphs and give the completed proofs of all results.
                                                                                                                                            The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the network
                                                                                                                                       linear equation, introduces the node encoders and decoders, and develops a distributed
                                                                                                                                       quantized algorithm. Section 3 presents the exact solver along with its convergence
                                                                                                                                       analysis and numerical examples. Section 4 further investigates the least-squares case.
                                                                                                                                       Finally, concluding remarks are given in section 5.
                                                                                                                                             Notation and terminology. All vectors are column vectors and denoted by bold,
                                                                                                                                       lowercase letters, i.e., a, b, c, etc.; matrices are denoted with bold, uppercase letters,
                                                                                                                                       i.e., A, B, C, etc.; sets are denoted with A, B, C, etc. Depending on the argument, | · |
                                                                                                                                       stands for the absolute value of a real number or the cardinality of a set. The Euclidean
                                                                                                                                       norm of a vector is denoted as k · k. ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. Let 1d and 0d
                                                                                                                                       denote the d-dimensional column vector with all entries equal to 1 and 0, respectively.
                                                                                                                                       Denote by Id the d×d identity matrix. An undirected graph is denoted by G = {V, E},
                                                                                                                                       where V = {1, . . . , N } is a finite set of nodes, and each element in E is an unordered
                                                                                                                                       pair of two distinct nodes in V, called an edge. A path in G from v1 to vp is a sequence
                                                                                                                                       of distinct nodes, v1 , v2 , . . . vp , such that (vk , vk+1 ) ∈ E, ∀ k = 1, . . . , p − 1. The graph
                                                                                                                                       G is termed connected if for any two distinct nodes i, j ∈ V, there is a path between
                                                                                                                                       them. The neighbor set of node i, denoted Ni , is defined as Ni = {j ∈ V : (i, j) ∈ E}.
                                                                                                                                       Define the degree matrix De = diag{|N1 |, . . . , |NN |}, where diag{d1 , . . . , dN } denotes
                                                                                                                                       the diagonal matrix with d1 , . . . , dN in the diagonal. Denote by A the adjacency
                                                                                                                                       matrix, where [A]ij = 1 if j ∈ Nj and [A]ij = 0 otherwise. Then L , De − A is the
                                                                                                                                       Laplacian matrix of the graph G.
                                                                                                                                           2. Problem statement and algorithm design. In this section, we introduce
                                                                                                                                       the network linear equation problem and design a distributed quantized algorithm.
                                                                                                                                             2.1. Linear equations over networks. Consider the linear equation

                                                                                                                                       (1)                                          z = Hy

                                                                                                                                       with respect to an unknown variable y ∈ Rm , where H ∈ RN ×m and z ∈ RN .
                                                                                                                                       Equation (1) has a unique exact solution if rank(H) = m and z ∈ span(H); an
                                                                                                                                       infinite set of solutions if rank(H) < m and z ∈ span(H); and no exact solutions if
                                                                                                                                       z∈ / span(H). When no exact solution exists, a least-squares solution of (1) can be
                                                                                                                                       defined via the following optimization problem:
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                       (2)                                      min z − Hy           ,
                                                                                                                                                                               y∈Rm


                                                                                                                                       which yields a unique solution y? = (HT H)−1 HT z if rank(H) = m. We denote by




                                                                                                                                             Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                          DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                            1195

                                                                                                                                                                           hT
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                             1               z1
                                                                                                                                                                          hT              z2 
                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                     H =  . ,        z =  . ,
                                                                                                                                                                                            
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                          ..              .. 
                                                                                                                                                                             hT
                                                                                                                                                                              N               zN

                                                                                                                                       where hi ∈ Rm with hT  i being the ith row vector of H. 
                                                                                                                                           Consider a network with N nodes indexed as V , 1, . . . , N , where node i has
                                                                                                                                       access to the value of hi and zi while without the knowledge of hj or zj from other
                                                                                                                                       nodes. The node interaction is described by a connected undirected graph G = {V, E}
                                                                                                                                       with the corresponding Laplacian matrix denoted by L. The aim of this paper is to
                                                                                                                                       develop a distributed method using quantized node communications and to explore
                                                                                                                                       the corresponding convergence properties with minimal data rate statements.
                                                                                                                                             2.2. Distributed quantized algorithm. The discrete-time is slotted at k =
                                                                                                                                       0, 1, 2, . . . . Node i at time k holds an estimate xi (k) ∈ Rm for the solution to (1) and
                                                                                                                                       exchanges information with its neighbors. Suppose that the communication channels
                                                                                                                                       corresponding to each edge in the network have a limited capacity or a finite band-
                                                                                                                                       width. As such, real-valued data should be quantized before transmitting. Thus,
                                                                                                                                       we propose a distributed quantized algorithm, where each node is associated with
                                                                                                                                       an encoder while its neighbors possess a corresponding decoder. Let us begin by
                                                                                                                                       introducing a uniform quantization function QK (·).
                                                                                                                                           Definition 2.1 (quantization function). A standard uniform quantizer is given
                                                                                                                                       by the function QK (·) : R → {−K, . . . , −1, 0, 1, . . . , K}, where
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                        0 if − 1/2 ≤ z ≤ 1/2,
                                                                                                                                                                         i if 2i−1 < z ≤ 2i+1
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                           2 , i = 1, . . . , K,
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                       (3)                QK (z) =              2
                                                                                                                                                                                   2K+1
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                        K if z > 2 ,
                                                                                                                                                                         −QK (−z) if z < −1/2.
                                                                                                                                                                     

                                                                                                                                            There is no need to send any information if the output of the quantizer is zero,
                                                                                                                                       so, for a 2K + 1-level quantizer, the communication channel is required to be capable
                                                                                                                                       of transmitting dlog2 (2K)e bits. With a slight abuse of notation, we define QK (a) for
                                                                                                                                       a vector a = (a1 , . . . , am )T ∈ Rm by QK (a) = (QK (a1 ), . . . , QK (am ))T .
                                                                                                                                            Next, we propose an encoder/decoder pair for each node to quantize its state and
                                                                                                                                       to estimate its neighbors’ states. Suppose all the nodes have a global scaling function
                                                                                                                                       s(k) > 0 ∀k, which is a decreasing sequence used to adaptively adjust the encoder.
                                                                                                                                       The scaling function will be specified upon the convergence analysis.

                                                                                                                                       Encoder
                                                                                                                                       Node j ∈ V recursively generates m-dimensional quantized outputs {qj (k)} and in-
                                                                                                                                       ternal states {bj (k)} from the exact state sequence {xi (k)} as follows for any k ≥ 1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                            qj (k) , QK             (xj (k) − bj (k − 1)) ,
                                                                                                                                       (4)                                 s(k − 1)
                                                                                                                                                            bj (k) , s(k − 1)qj (k) + bj (k − 1),

                                                                                                                                       where s(k) > 0 is a global scaling function and the initial value bj (0) = 0.




                                                                                                                                             Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1196                  J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                            Remark 2.2. Note that bj (k) is a one-step predictor and the encoder is a dif-
                                                                                                                                       ference encoder with a zooming-in scaling s(k) that quantizes the prediction error
                                                                                                                                       xj (k) − bj (k − 1), the difference between xj (k) and bj (k − 1), rather than the state
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       xj (k). Generally speaking, the amplitude of the prediction error is smaller than that
                                                                                                                                       of the state itself, so it can be represented by fewer bits. We use the scaling function
                                                                                                                                       s(k) to zoom-in each node’s prediction error and require that s(k) decays gradually
                                                                                                                                       to make the quantizer persistently excited, such that the nodes gradually increase the
                                                                                                                                       accuracy of state recovery of their neighbors. On the other hand, s(k) should be large
                                                                                                                                       enough such that the quantizer will not be saturated, in which case the quantization
                                                                                                                                       error is bounded. The detailed selection of s(k) will be given subsequently in sections
                                                                                                                                       3 and 4 upon convergence analysis and simulation studies.
                                                                                                                                           Node j ∈ V at time k sends its quantized output qj (k) to its neighboring node
                                                                                                                                       i ∈ Nj , which then recovers node j’s state using the decoder defined as follows.

                                                                                                                                       Decoder
                                                                                                                                       When node i ∈ Nj receives the quantized data qj (k) from node j, a decoder recursively
                                                                                                                                       generates an estimate x̂ij (k) for xj (k) by the following for any k ≥ 1:

                                                                                                                                       (5)                        x̂ij (k) , s(k − 1)qj (k) + x̂ij (k − 1),

                                                                                                                                       where s(k) > 0 is a global scaling function and the initial value x̂ij (0) = 0.

                                                                                                                                            Based on the encoder/decoder pair defined in (4) and (5), we now propose the
                                                                                                                                       following distributed linear equation solver with quantized communications.

                                                                                                                                       Algorithm 1. Distributed quantized algorithm.
                                                                                                                                       Each node i ∈ V at time k + 1 updates its estimate xi (k + 1) as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                       X
                                                                                                                                                                         x̂ij (k) − bi (k) − γ(k) hi h>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                       (6)   xi (k + 1) = xi (k) + h                                 i xi (k) − zi hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                        j∈Ni


                                                                                                                                       where h > 0 is the control gain, γ(k) > 0 is the step-size, and bi (k) and x̂ij (k) are
                                                                                                                                       produced by the encoder (4) and the decoder (5), respectively.

                                                                                                                                            It is clear that Algorithm 1 merely relies on quantized node communication since
                                                                                                                                       qj (k) takes its value in the alphabet {−K, . . . , −1, 0, 1, . . . , K} only. From the second
                                                                                                                                       equation of (4), using (5) and the initial conditions for x̂ij (0) and bj (0), we have the
                                                                                                                                       following for any k ≥ 0:
                                                                                                                                       (7)                         x̂ij (k) = bj (k) ∀j ∈ V, ∀i ∈ Nj .
                                                                                                                                           Note that the algorithm (6) is a discretization of the continuous-time “Consen-
                                                                                                                                       sus + Projection” flow (equation (3)) method in [38], combined with quantization.
                                                                                                                                       However, [38] requires continuous-time communications among the neighboring nodes,
                                                                                                                                       where nodes need to exchange the exact real-valued states for the execution. This
                                                                                                                                       requires the communication channels to have unlimited bandwidth, while in digital
                                                                                                                                       networks, communication channels usually have a finite channel capacity. It is worth
                                                                                                                                       noting that the proposed Algorithm 1 can resolve such a finite bandwidth problem
                                                                                                                                       since it merely requires discrete-time communications with finite bits at each round
                                                                                                                                       of communication.




                                                                                                                                             Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                           DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                               1197

                                                                                                                                           3. Exact solutions. In this section, we consider Algorithm 1 and investigate the
                                                                                                                                       case that (1) has a unique solution. We establish the convergence results regarding
                                                                                                                                       the quantization levels along with the rate analysis and demonstrate the results with
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       numerical simulations.
                                                                                                                                           3.1. Convergence result. We impose the following assumptions:
                                                                                                                                           A1. There exists a unique solution y∗ , i.e., rank(H) = m and z ∈ span(H).
                                                                                                                                           A2. maxi kxi (0)k∞ ≤ Cx for some known positive constant Cx .
                                                                                                                                           A3. γ(k) ≡ 1, and s(k) , s(0)αk for any k ≥ 0 with s(0) > 0 and α ∈ (0, 1).
                                                                                                                                           A2 requires that the upper bound of initial estimates is known. Suppose we set
                                                                                                                                       the initial estimate of each node i ∈ V as xi (0) = 0m . Then it immediately follows
                                                                                                                                       that Cx = 0. We will specify the selection of s(0) upon convergence statements. For
                                                                                                                                       the ease of analysis for Algorithm 1, we assume within this section that
                                                                                                                                       (8)                                khi k2 = 1 ∀i ∈ V.
                                                                                                                                       This can be easily achieved through the local normalization hi /khi k2 and zi /khi k2
                                                                                                                                       by each node i. We now introduce some notation for defining circumstances under
                                                                                                                                       which the quantizer will not be saturated. Define
                                                                                                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                               zH , col{zi h1 , . . . , zN hN } = zi hT1 , . . . , zN hTN ∈ RmN ,
                                                                                                                                       (9)
                                                                                                                                              Hd , diag h1 h>                   >       mN ×mN
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                1 , . . . , hN hN ∈ R                , and Fd , L ⊗ Im + Hd .
                                                                                                                                       Note that both the Laplacian matrix L and the matrix Hd are positive semidefinite.
                                                                                                                                       By A1 and the condition that the undirected graph G is connected, the matrix Fd
                                                                                                                                       turns out to be positive definite [38, Lemma 9]; hence, all eigenvalues of Fd are
                                                                                                                                       positive. The eigenvalues of L can be written in an ascending order as 0 = λ1 (L) <
                                                                                                                                       λ2 (L) ≤ · · · ≤ λN (L). Set
                                                                                                                                       (10)
                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                             X
                                                                                                                                                 ρh , 1 − hλmin (Fd ), Mhx , ρh Cx + λ−1
                                                                                                                                                                                      min          hi hTi       N kzH k∞ + hkzH k∞ ,
                                                                                                                                                                                             i=1
                                                                                                                                                                √
                                                                                                                                                   1 + 2hd∗   h2 mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )            l          1m
                                                                                                                                        M (α, h) ,          +                        , K(α, h) , M (α, h) − ,
                                                                                                                                                      2α          2α(α − ρh )                              2
                                                                                                                                       where d∗ = maxi |Ni | denotes the maximum degree in G, and λmin (A) and λmax (A)
                                                                                                                                       denote the smallest and the largest eigenvalue of a matrix A, respectively.
                                                                                                                                           We are ready to investigate the performance of Algorithm 1 as an exact solver for
                                                                                                                                       the network linear equation (1). Proposition 3.1 with the proof deferred to Appendix
                                                                                                                                       B.1 validates the nonsaturation of the designed quantizer.
                                                                                                                                           Proposition 3.1 (quantizer nonsaturation). Let A1, A2, and A3 hold. Con-
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                       sider Algorithm 1, where h ∈ (0, λmin (Fd )+λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                              ) and α ∈ (1 − hλmin (Fd ), 1). Then
                                                                                                                                       for any K ≥ K(α, h), the quantizer will never be saturated provided that s(0) satisfies
                                                                                                                                                         (                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                                           (1 + hkHd k∞ )Cx + hkzH k∞ 2(α − ρh ) (Mhx + hCx λN (L))
                                                                                                                                       (11) s(0) > max                                      ,                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                      K + 21                             hλN (L)

                                                                                                                                           It is noticed that the proposed method (Algorithm 1) is a synchronized algorithm,
                                                                                                                                       which requires some sort of networkwide coordination of algorithm parameters. In
                                                                                                                                       the following, we provide a few remarks on the control gain h, the initial scaling value
                                                                                                                                       s(0), and the scaling factor α for practical implementation.




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1198                    J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                              Remark 3.2. Note by (8) that for any x = (xT1 , . . . , xTN )T , xi ∈ Rm with kxk22 = 1,
                                                                                                                                                             N                       N                         N
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                             X                       X                         X
                                                                                                                                                                   xTi hi hTi xi ≤         kxi k22 khi k22 =         kxi k22 = 1.
                                                                                                                                                             i=1                     i=1                       i=1

                                                                                                                                       Then the following holds:
                                                                                                                                                       max         x T Fd x ≤         max          x T L ⊗ Im x +             max        xT Hd x
                                                                                                                                                  x∈RmN ,kxk2 =1                x∈RmN ,kxk2 =1                          x∈RmN ,kxk2 =1
                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                      X
                                                                                                                                                     = λN (L) +          max                xTi hi hTi xi ≤ λN (L) + 1
                                                                                                                                                                    x∈RmN ,kxk2 =1
                                                                                                                                                                                      i=1
                                                                                                                                       (12)          ⇒ λmin (Fd ) ≤ λmax (Fd ) ≤ λN (L) + 1.
                                                                                                                                       Thus, from (12) and λN (L) ≤ 2d∗ [17, Lemma A.2] it follows that
                                                                                                                                                                         2                  1         1
                                                                                                                                       (13)                                           ≥            ≥ ∗     .
                                                                                                                                                              λmin (Fd ) + λmax (Fd )   λN (L) + 1  2d + 1
                                                                                                                                       Then we can set the parameter h within the range h ∈ (0, 2d∗1+1 ), which merely
                                                                                                                                       requires knowledge of the maximum degree of the communication graph G. Note that
                                                                                                                                       in the proposed scheme, all nodes use an identical control gain h; this may require
                                                                                                                                       additional coordination among the nodes before running the distributed algorithms.
                                                                                                                                       Recently, techniques utilizing uncoordinated step-sizes have been proposed in [29] for
                                                                                                                                       distributed strongly convex optimization. How to incorporate such a scheme into the
                                                                                                                                       distributed quantized method remains a future work.
                                                                                                                                          Remark 3.3. The scaling function s(k) is designed off-line. Suppose we set xi (0) =
                                                                                                                                       0m for each agent i ∈ V; then Cx = 0. Since Fd is positive definite, we have that
                                                                                                                                                                              x T Fd x                      x T Fd x
                                                                                                                                                         λmin (Fd ) = min              ≤        min
                                                                                                                                                                        x∈RmN xT x       x=(1N ⊗Im )y,y∈Rm xT x
                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                             yT i=1 hi hTi y
                                                                                                                                                                                P                       X
                                                                                                                                                                      = minm                 = λmin         hi hTi .
                                                                                                                                                                        y∈R        yT y                 i=1

                                                                                                                                       This combined with (10) produces Mhx ≤ λ−1 min (Fd )N kzH k∞ + hkzH k∞ . By setting
                                                                                                                                       α , 1 − hλmin (Fd )/2 and using ρh = 1 − hλmin (Fd ), we know that (11) holds when
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                            h       1
                                                                                                                                       (14)          s(0) > kzH k∞ max          ,        (N + hλmin (Fd )) .
                                                                                                                                                                          K + 12 λN (L)
                                                                                                                                       Recall that λN (L) ≥ d∗ by [17, Lemma A.2]. Then by (12) and (14) it is seen that
                                                                                                                                       s(0) given by the following satisfies (11):
                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                     N +h
                                                                                                                                       (15)                        s(0) > kzH k∞ h +        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                      d∗
                                                                                                                                       which merely requires the knowledge of kzH k∞ , the number of nodes in the network,
                                                                                                                                       and the maximum degree of the communication graph G. This is a conservative but
                                                                                                                                       sufficient selection of s(0), while smaller s(0) might be available in practice. Ad-
                                                                                                                                       ditionally, the identical zoom-in factor α used by all nodes may require additional
                                                                                                                                       coordination among the nodes. Though the theoretical analysis of Algorithm 1 with
                                                                                                                                       node-specific scaling function si (k) = si (0)αik remains unknown, the simulation result
                                                                                                                                       shown by Figure 4 in section 3.2 still displays the geometric rate of convergence.




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                            DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                    1199

                                                                                                                                           Based on Proposition 3.1, we are able to show that the generated sequences
                                                                                                                                       converge to the unique exact solution with a geometric rate. The result is shown in
                                                                                                                                       the following theorem, while the proof can be found in Appendix B.2.
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                            Theorem 3.4 (high data rate).            Suppose A1, A2, and A3 hold. Let h ∈
                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                       (0, λmin (Fd )+λ max (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                  ) and α ∈ (1 − hλmin (Fd ), 1). Then for any K ≥ K(α, h), along
                                                                                                                                       Algorithm 1 there holds
                                                                                                                                       (16)                                 lim xi (k) = y∗      ∀i ∈ V
                                                                                                                                                                           k→∞

                                                                                                                                       provided that s(0) satisfies (11). The convergence is exponential with
                                                                                                                                                                                    √
                                                                                                                                                                               hs(0) mN λN (L) k
                                                                                                                                       (17)            kx(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ k2 ≤                     α    ∀k ≥ 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                  2α(α − ρh )
                                                                                                                                       where x(k) , col{x1 (k), . . . , xN (k)} = (xT1 (k), . . . , xTN (k))T .
                                                                                                                                            Equation (16) in Theorem 3.4 shows that by using an exponentially decaying
                                                                                                                                       scaling function and a dlog2 (K(α, h))e-bit uniform quantizer, Algorithm 1 can ensure
                                                                                                                                       asymptotic convergence to the unique solution. It is worth pointing out that for
                                                                                                                                       any given α, h, the quantization level K(α, h) defined by (10) might be sufficient but
                                                                                                                                       conservative, while fewer bits could be necessary in practice; see the simulation results
                                                                                                                                       of Example 1 in section 3.2. But the value of K(α, h) gives us some intuition on the
                                                                                                                                       relationship between the number of bits required and the control gain h along with
                                                                                                                                       the scaling factor α.
                                                                                                                                           Remark 3.5. Equation (17) in Theorem 3.4 gives an estimate of the convergence
                                                                                                                                       rate. The convergence rate is faster with a smaller scaling factor α, implying that
                                                                                                                                       more bits have to be communicated by (10). Moreover, when α → ρh , the required
                                                                                                                                       number of bits goes to infinity. Thus, an appropriate selection of the scaling factor α
                                                                                                                                       amounts to a trade-off between the convergence rate and communication overhead.
                                                                                                                                            With (10), the quantization level K(α, h) will tend to infinity as N → ∞ for any
                                                                                                                                       fixed α and h. However, the communication channel usually has a finite bandwidth
                                                                                                                                       in practice. In order to satisfy this requirement, we aim to use a fixed number of
                                                                                                                                       quantization levels at the cost of a possible slower convergence. For any given K ≥ 1,
                                                                                                                                       define
                                                                                                                                       (18)                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                2                                                  1
                                                                                                                                         ΞK , (α, h) : h ∈ 0,                                       , α ∈ (ρh , 1), M (α, h) < K +         .
                                                                                                                                                                     λmin (Fd ) + λmax (Fd )                                       2
                                                                                                                                       Based on the above definition, we have the following result, for which the proof is
                                                                                                                                       given in Appendix B.3.
                                                                                                                                            Theorem 3.6 (low data rate). Suppose A1, A2, and A3 hold. Then for any
                                                                                                                                       K ≥ 1, ΞK is nonempty, and for any (α, h) ∈ ΞK , along Algorithm 1 with s(0)
                                                                                                                                       satisfying (11) there holds
                                                                                                                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                                                                             hs(0) mN λN (L) k
                                                                                                                                                        kx(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ k2 ≤                α  ∀k ≥ 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                2α(α − ρh )
                                                                                                                                           Remark 3.7. From Theorem 3.6 it is clear that we can always design a distributed
                                                                                                                                       network linear equation solver to ensure an exponential convergence to the exact
                                                                                                                                       solution with a 3-level quantizer (namely, K = 1), under which each node sends
                                                                                                                                       merely m bits of information to its neighbors at each step.




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1200                   J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                           It is seen from (18) that the set ΞK is defined by three nonlinear inequalities,
                                                                                                                                       and evidently an explicit solution of these inequalities might be difficult to obtain.
                                                                                                                                       Then in the following, we give an explicit method for choosing parameters (α, h)
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       from ΞK for any given K ≥ 1 by introducing a free parameter ν ∈ (0, 1). For
                                                                                                                                       any ν ∈ (0, 1), let αν = 1 − (1 − ν)hν λmin (Fd ) and hν ∈ (0, h∗K,ν ), where h∗K,ν ,
                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                       min{ λmin (Fd )+λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                  , ĥK,ν } with

                                                                                                                                                                                   √
                                                                                                                                                         ĥK,ν , 2Kνλmin (Fd )         mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                       (19)                                                                     !−1
                                                                                                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                                                                            + 2νλmin (Fd )d     + ν(1 − ν)(2K + 1)λ2min (Fd )         .

                                                                                                                                           Proposition 3.8. Fix K ≥ 1. Then for any ν ∈ (0, 1), (αν , hν ) ∈ ΞK . Con-
                                                                                                                                       versely, for any (α, h) ∈ ΞK , there exists a ν > 0 such that α = 1 − (1 − ν)hλmin (Fd )
                                                                                                                                       and h ∈ (0, h∗K,ν ).
                                                                                                                                            The proof of Proposition 3.8 is given in Appendix B.4. Based on Proposition 3.8,
                                                                                                                                       to find a pair of parameters (α, h) ∈ ΞK , we can simply apply the following procedure:
                                                                                                                                       (i) pick ν ∈ (0, 1); (ii) choose α = αν ; (iii) compute h∗K,ν and select any h ∈ (0, h∗K,ν ).
                                                                                                                                       Meanwhile, the parameter ν ∈ (0, 1) can be used to tune the algorithm parameters α
                                                                                                                                       and h. In addition, such a selection method can find all feasible algorithm parameters.
                                                                                                                                            Based on the exponential rate of convergence given by (17), it can be easily seen
                                                                                                                                       that the number of iterations required to obtain an -accurate solution x satisfying
                                                                                                                                       kx−1N ⊗y∗ k2 ≤  is bounded by τ (), where τ () is defined as in (20). Because the so-
                                                                                                                                       lution y∗ is an m-dimension vector and a 2K +1-level uniform quantizer QK (·) is used
                                                                                                                                       in the update, the communication bits required per step at each link is mdlog2 (2K)e.
                                                                                                                                       Since node i has |Ni | neighboring nodes, the total number of communication bits
                                                                                                                                       required by node i to obtain an -solution is bounded by m|Ni |dlog2 (2K)eτ (). Recall
                                                                                                                                       that there are |E| links in the network and the communication is bidirectional at each
                                                                                                                                       link; the total number of bits required to obtain an -accurate solution bounded by
                                                                                                                                       2m|E|dlog2 (2K)eτ (). We conclude these results in Corollary 3.9, which gives a bound
                                                                                                                                       on the number of iterations and communication bits required to obtain an -accurate
                                                                                                                                       solution to the linear equation (1).
                                                                                                                                            Corollary 3.9 (communication complexity). For any K ≥ 1, let (α, h) ∈ ΞK
                                                                                                                                       and s(0) satisfy (11). Let x(k) be generated by Algorithm 1. Then for any  > 0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    √          
                                                                                                                                                                                         ln −1 hs(0)  mN λN (L)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2α(α−ρh )
                                                                                                                                       (20)     kx(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ k2 ≤  ∀k ≥ τ () ,                  −1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                               ln(α              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                       The total number of communicated bits required by node i to obtain an -accurate
                                                                                                                                       solution is bounded by m|Ni |dlog2 (2K)eτ ().
                                                                                                                                           The communication complexity stated in Corollary 3.9 holds for any given K ≥ 1.
                                                                                                                                       Sometimes, we aim to choose the quantization level K and algorithmic parameter
                                                                                                                                       α, h to minimize the total communication bits, i.e., minK≥1,(α,h)∈ΞK dlog2 (2K)eτ ().
                                                                                                                                       However, this optimization problem is nonconvex, and the global optimum is generally
                                                                                                                                       unavailable. As such, it remains an open question to determine the best selection of
                                                                                                                                       K, α, h.
                                                                                                                                           Though the proposed distributed protocol ensures exponential convergence with
                                                                                                                                       rate αk , the parameter α is coupled with another algorithm parameter h while without




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                           DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                           1201

                                                                                                                                       explicit dependence on the linear equations and the network. Besides, the number of
                                                                                                                                       nodes is relatively large in some applications. This motivates us to investigate the
                                                                                                                                       asymptotic property of α as N → ∞ and give a very compendious expression for the
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       asymptotic value of α. The proof of Theorem 3.10 can be found in Appendix B.5.
                                                                                                                                           Theorem 3.10 (network scalability). Adopt the same hypotheses as Theorem
                                                                                                                                       3.6. Let K ≥ 1 and (α, h) ∈ ΞK , where ΞK is defined by (18). Then
                                                                                                                                                                              inf (α,h)∈ΞK α
                                                                                                                                       (21)                      lim      
                                                                                                                                                                                   Kλ2   (F )
                                                                                                                                                                                                        = 1.
                                                                                                                                                                N →∞                      d
                                                                                                                                                                       exp − 2√mN λ min
                                                                                                                                                                                     (L)λ
                                                                                                                                                                                     N     max (Fd )


                                                                                                                                            Remark 3.11. Theorem 3.10 together with (17) suggests that for a large-scale
                                                                                                                                       network, the highest possible convergence rate under the proposed protocol tends
                                                                                                                                                                                          λ2 (F )
                                                                                                                                       to scale with O (exp (−kΘN K)) , where ΘN , 2√mN λmin(L)λd (F ) is some constant
                                                                                                                                                                                           N     max d
                                                                                                                                       relying only on the number of nodes, the dimension of the solution, the network
                                                                                                                                       structure, and the observation matrix.

                                                                                                                                              3.2. Numerical examples.
                                                                                                                                            Example 1. Let H and z in the linear equation (1) be given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                               0.9806 −0.1961                 0.3922
                                                                                                                                                             −0.8944 0.4472               0.4472 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                       (22)            H=    0.3939    −0.9191    , z =  −2.3635  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                             0.8944      0.4472           2.2361 
                                                                                                                                                              −0.5145 0.8575                  2.0580
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                       which then yields a unique exact solution y∗ = (      ). The network structure among
                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                       the five nodes is shown in Figure 1. Note that λN (L) = 4.1701 and λmax (Fd ) = 4.9687,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                       which satisfies the upper bound on λmax (Fd ) given by (12), while λmin (Fd )+λ max (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                       0.3867 > 2d∗ +1 = 0.1429, which implies that the estimated upper bound on h given
                                                                                                                                       by (13) is relatively conservative.
                                                                                                                                            Validation of Theorem 3.4. Let h = λmin (Fd1.98    )+λmax (Fd ) = 0.3828. Here one
                                                                                                                                       can compute ρh = 0.922. Set α = 0.96 so that K(α, h) = 135. Suppose we set the
                                                                                                                                       initial value xi (0) = 0m for each node i ∈ V; then the lower bound kzH k∞ h + Nd+h ∗

                                                                                                                                       of s(0) given by (15) equals 5.1457. As mentioned in Remark 3.3, such a selection
                                                                                                                                       of s(0) is conservative, so we set s(0) to be a smaller value s(0) = 1. We then
                                                                                                                                       implement Algorithm 1 with h = 0.3828, s(0) = 1, α = 0.96 for K = 100, 135, 150,
                                                                                                                                       respectively. Figure 2 displays the trajectories
                                                                                                                                                                                     √
                                                                                                                                                                                        of w(k) = ||x(k)−1N ⊗y∗ ||2 along with
                                                                                                                                                                              hs(0)αk mN λN (L)
                                                                                                                                       the theoretical upper bound B(k) =          2α(α−ρh )     given by (17). The trajectory




                                                                                                                                                                       Fig. 1. Communication graph.




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1202                  J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                                                                                  105




                                                                                                                                                              w(k) = ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         w(k) with K = 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         w(k) with K = 135
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         w(k) with K = 150
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                  100                                    B(k) with α = 0.96



                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-5


                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0           100        200       300      400       500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k

                                                                                                                                              Fig. 2. Trajectories of w(k) = ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 along with the upper bound Bk .
                                                                                                                                                                   w(k) = ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  100



                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-5       w(k) with K1 = 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            w(k) with K2 = 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                            w(k) with K3 = 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                            B1 (k) with K1 = 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-10      B2 (k) with K2 = 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                            B3 (k) with K3 = 12
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0        2000       4000       6000     8000     10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k


                                                                                                                                           Fig. 3. Trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 and B(k) with K1 = 3, K2 = 6, and K3 = 12.


                                                                                                                                       with K = 135 verifies that Theorem 3.4 provides a sufficient condition on the data
                                                                                                                                       rate to ensure convergence, while the coincidence of the trajectories for K = 135
                                                                                                                                       and K = 150 > K(α, h) implies that with the same algorithm parameters α, h, a
                                                                                                                                       quantization level higher than K(α, h) might not lead to a faster convergence rate.
                                                                                                                                       It is noticed that the trajectory for K = 100 < K(α, h) coincides with that for
                                                                                                                                       K = 135, which implies some degree of conservativeness in the sufficient conditions
                                                                                                                                       of Theorem 3.4.
                                                                                                                                            Validation of Theorem 3.6. Let K be K1 = 3, K2 = 6, and K3 = 12,
                                                                                                                                       respectively. We choose (α, h) ∈ ΞK according to Proposition 3.8. Let ν = 0.5; we
                                                                                                                                       then choose (α1 , h1 ) = (0.9993, 0.0068), (α2 , h2 ) = (0.9986, 0.0136), and (α3 , h3 ) =
                                                                                                                                       (0.9972, 0.0272). We set the initial values x(0) = 0mN and s(0) = kzH k∞ h + 1+h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d∗ ,
                                                                                                                                       smaller than the bound given by (15), i.e., s1 (0) = 0.8093, s2 (0) = 0.8307, s3 (0) =
                                                                                                                                       0.8735 for K1 , K2 , K3 , respectively. The trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 under the
                                                                                                                                       three sets of parameters are shown in Figure 3, which demonstrates the exponential
                                                                                                                                       convergence of Algorithm 1 to the exact solution. A higher data rate allows us to
                                                                                                                                       choose a larger h and a smaller α and therefore leads to a faster     √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   convergence rate.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                       Figure 3 is consistent with the upper bound B(k) = hs(0)α               mN λN (L)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2α(α−ρh )       on the rate
                                                                                                                                       given by (17) in all three parameter settings.
                                                                                                                                            In addition, we implement Algorithm 1 with node-specific control gain hi , scaling
                                                                                                                                       function si (k) = si (0)αik , and quantization level Ki . We choose a different control gain
                                                                                                                                       for each node (see Table 1). Then for each i = 1, . . . , 5, we set αi = 1 − hi λmin (Fd )/2,
                                                                                                                                       si (0) = kzH k∞ hi + 1+h  d∗
                                                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                                                       , and Ki = K(αi , hi ). The derived parameters for each
                                                                                                                                       node are shown in Table 1. We show the trajectory ||xi (k) − y∗ ||2 of each node i
                                                                                                                                       in Figure 4, which still displays the exponential rate of convergence. It is seen from
                                                                                                                                       Figure 4 that node 5 with K5 = 101 has the fastest rate, while node 1 with K1 = 74
                                                                                                                                       has the slowest rate. This conforms to the intuition that the node with a higher data
                                                                                                                                       rate might have a faster rate of convergence.




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                           DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                                                     1203
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Table 1
                                                                                                                                                                                             Algorithm parameters for each node.
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                        Node 1       Node 2       Node 3         Node 4             Node 5
                                                                                                                                                            hi                            0.22        0.24         0.26           0.28                0.3
                                                                                                                                                            αi                          0 .9777      0.9756       0.9736         0.9716             0.9695
                                                                                                                                                           si (0)                       1.4811       1.5442       1.6072         1.6702             1.7332
                                                                                                                                                            Ki                             74          81           87             95                 105



                                                                                                                                                                                                    node 1 node 2 node 3 node 4 node 5
                                                                                                                                                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                                ||xi (k) − y∗ ||2




                                                                                                                                                                                    10-5



                                                                                                                                                                                             0      200          400         600              800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k


                                                                                                                                             Fig. 4. Trajectories of ||xi (k) − y∗ ||2 for each node i with uncoordinated parameters.


                                                                                                                                                                                       0.99995                     ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  αK = inf {α|(α, h) ∈ ΞK }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         α
                                                                                                                                                                    damping factor α




                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9999                    exp(−KΘN )

                                                                                                                                                                                       0.99985

                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9998

                                                                                                                                                                                       0.99975

                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9997
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5                     1                   1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                          quantization level K        ×105


                                                                                                                                               Fig. 5. The minimal α∗K and exp(−KΘN ) with respect to quantization level K.



                                                                                                                                           Example 2 (Validation of Theorem 3.10). We let N = 100 and m = 5. We
                                                                                                                                       randomly generate a matrix H and z such that z = Hy has a unique solution. We set
                                                                                                                                                                                                        λ2 (F )
                                                                                                                                       L as the Laplacian of a cycle graph. Then the constant ΘN = 2√mN λmin(L)λd (F ) is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N   max   d
                                                                                                                                       fixed at 2.4910×10−9 . We let K increase from K = 4×104 to K = 1.5×105 in steps of
                                                                                                                                       1000 and search for the minimal α such that (α, h) ∈ ΞK for some h > 0 numerically
                                                                                                                                                          ∗                                                ∗
                                                                                                                                       for each K, i.e., αK = inf α {α|(α, h) ∈ ΞK }. Figure 5 shows how αK   varies according
                                                                                                                                       to the data rate K and implies that a higher data rate allows the selection of a smaller
                                                                                                                                       α and hence potentially leads to a faster convergence rate. Figure 5 also displays the
                                                                                                                                       trajectory of exp(−KΘN ) with respect to K and shows that exp(−KΘN ) is quite
                                                                                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                                                                       close to αK  for N = 100, validating Theorem 3.10.

                                                                                                                                           Example 3 (Network structure). Let N = 100 and m = 10. We randomly gener-
                                                                                                                                       ate a matrix H and z such that z = Hy has a unique solution. We aim to investigate
                                                                                                                                       how ΘN depends on the network structure. Note that for a complete graph, star
                                                                                                                                       graph, and cycle graph, ΘN takes its value as 6.9199 × 10−9 , 1.8553 × 10−9 , and
                                                                                                                                       8.2899 × 10−8 , respectively. This surprisingly indicates cycle graphs produce the
                                                                                                                                       fastest convergence compared to complete and star graphs. We then compute ΘN for
                                                                                                                                       Erdős–Rènyi random graphs G(N, p), where each pair of two nodes is connected with
                                                                                                                                       a probability of p, independently of every other edge. We let p increase from 0.1 to




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1204                    J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON

                                                                                                                                                                                ×10-7
                                                                                                                                                                          1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   λ2min (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Θ̄N = √
                                                                                                                                                                          1.2                                                  2 mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )

                                                                                                                                                                           1
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                          0.8




                                                                                                                                                                    Θ̄N
                                                                                                                                                                          0.6

                                                                                                                                                                          0.4

                                                                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                           0.1          0.2   0.3   0.4       0.5       0.6      0.7      0.8          0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Connection probability p



                                                                                                                                                  Fig. 6. The mean Θ̄N for random graphs generated with different probability p.


                                                                                                                                       0.9 at a step of 0.05. For each probability p, we randomly generate 103 connected
                                                                                                                                       graphs with G(N, p) and compute the mean Θ̄N . Figure 6 shows how Θ̄N varies along
                                                                                                                                       with probability p, which decreases as the connection probability p increases. This
                                                                                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                                                                       implies that αK  , the fastest possible convergence rate under a fixed data rate K,
                                                                                                                                       might increase with the increasing of the network connectivity.
                                                                                                                                            3.3. Discussion: Improve robustness with damping. Convergence of Al-
                                                                                                                                       gorithm 1 relies on the equivalence between node i’s decoder output x̂ij (k) of its
                                                                                                                                       neighbor j’ state and node j’s one-step prediction bj (k), which is characterized by
                                                                                                                                       (7). The theoretical and numerical results have shown the effectiveness of Algorithm
                                                                                                                                       1 when (7) is satisfied. In fact, (7) holds when the encoder/decoder update (4)–(5) is
                                                                                                                                       exact and the following initialization condition is satisfied:

                                                                                                                                       (23)                       bj (0) = 0, x̂ij (0) = 0 ∀j ∈ V, ∀i ∈ Nj .

                                                                                                                                            However, there could exist initialization errors in (23). And due to round-off
                                                                                                                                       noises in the storage and manipulation of real-valued vectors in digital computers,
                                                                                                                                       (4)–(5) may not be executed exactly. With initialization errors in (23) and the round-
                                                                                                                                       off noises, the update of bj (k), x̂ij (k) in encoder/decoder (4)–(5) is changed to

                                                                                                                                                                bj (0) = Iej , x̂ij (0) = Ieij ∀j ∈ V, ∀i ∈ Nj ,
                                                                                                                                       (24)                     bj (k) , s(k − 1)qj (k) + bj (k − 1) + εbj (k),
                                                                                                                                                               x̂ij (k) , s(k − 1)qj (k) + x̂ij (k − 1) + εxij (k).

                                                                                                                                       The initialization errors Iej , Ieij and round-off noises εbj (k), εxij (k) will persist and ac-
                                                                                                                                       cumulate during the execution of the algorithm.
                                                                                                                                           Performance of Algorithm 1 with initialization errors and round-off
                                                                                                                                       noises. We continue to use the same H and z in (22). We set h = 0.0193, α = 0.998,
                                                                                                                                       K = 64, and s(0) = 1. The initialization errors Iej and Ieji are independent across the
                                                                                                                                       nodes and are randomly drawn from a uniform distribution on [0, 0.5]. The round-off
                                                                                                                                       noises εbj (k), εxji (k) are mutually independent random independent and identically
                                                                                                                                       distributed (i.i.d.) sequences with each value drawn from a uniform distribution on
                                                                                                                                       [−1, 1] × 10−4 . Figure 7 shows that Algorithm 1 with (24) cannot ensure conver-
                                                                                                                                       gence when there exist initialization errors or round-off noises. In fact, the error is
                                                                                                                                       substantial compared with the noise magnitude and the value ||1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 .
                                                                                                                                           We propose to improve algorithm robustness by adding a damping term to the
                                                                                                                                       encoder/decoder, where bj (k) and x̂ij (k) are updated with

                                                                                                                                                               bj (0) = Iej , x̂ij (0) = Ieij ∀j ∈ V, ∀i ∈ Nj ,
                                                                                                                                       (25)                    bj (k) , s(k − 1)qj (k) + %bj (k − 1) + εbj (k),
                                                                                                                                                              x̂ij (k) , s(k − 1)qj (k) + %x̂ij (k − 1) + εxij (k),




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                             DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                                               1205

                                                                                                                                                                                                 104




                                                                                                                                                                 ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              initialization errors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              round-off noises
                                                                                                                                                                                                 100                          both errors and noises


                                                                                                                                                                                          10-2


                                                                                                                                                                                          10-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0   2000       4000         6000        8000       10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k

                                                                                                                                            Fig. 7. Trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 generated by Algorithm 1 for the following cases: (i)
                                                                                                                                       there exist initialization errors; (ii) there exist round-off noises; (iii) there exist both initialization
                                                                                                                                       errors and round-off noises.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Alg.1 with damping for initialization errors
                                                                                                                                                                                                 102               Alg.1 with damping for round-off noises
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Alg.1 with damping for both errors and noises
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Alg.1 without errors or noises
                                                                                                                                                                          ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2




                                                                                                                                                                                                 100


                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-2


                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-4


                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-6
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0     0.5               1              1.5           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k                         ×104


                                                                                                                                            Fig. 8. Trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 of Algorithm 1 with a damped encoder/decoder (25)
                                                                                                                                       with (i) initialization errors; (ii) round-off noises; (iii) both errors and noises; and (iv) Algorithm 1
                                                                                                                                       without errors or noises.

                                                                                                                                       where % ∈ (0, 1) is a damping factor, Iej , Ieij are initialization errors, and εbj (k), εxij (k)
                                                                                                                                       are round-off noises. We run Algorithm 1 with a damped encoder/decoder (25) when
                                                                                                                                       there are initialization errors and round-off noises, and we run Algorithm 1 with the
                                                                                                                                       encoder and decoder (4)–(5) where there are no initialization errors and round-off
                                                                                                                                       noises, both with the same algorithm parameters. The damping factor is set as % =
                                                                                                                                       0.95. Figure 8 displays the simulation results, which show that (i) the damping can
                                                                                                                                       significantly reduce but not fully eliminate the affect of initialization errors, and (ii)
                                                                                                                                       the effect of round-off noises can be tolerated in the sense that the iterates will converge
                                                                                                                                       to a neighborhood of the exact solution within a distance of similar magnitude to the
                                                                                                                                       round-off noises.
                                                                                                                                           The formal convergence analysis of Algorithm 1 with a damped encoder/decoder
                                                                                                                                       update (25) is challenging because there will be a nonlinear coupling between the
                                                                                                                                       damping factor % and other parameters, and the initialization errors and round-off
                                                                                                                                       noises as well as % will enter the update equation of x(k) and b(k) given by (A.4) and
                                                                                                                                       (A.5). Therefore, we leave the theoretical analysis of (25) as a future research problem.

                                                                                                                                           4. Least-squares solver. In this section, we investigate the case rank(H) = m
                                                                                                                                       and z ∈ / span(H). Then (1) does not have exact solutions, while a least-squares
                                                                                                                                       solution is defined as the solution to the optimization problem (2). Considering




                                                                                                                                            Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1206                   J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                       Algorithm 1, we show its convergence results regarding the quantization level along
                                                                                                                                       with the data rate analysis and demonstrate the results with numerical simulations.
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                           4.1. Convergence results. Assumptions A1 and A3 are no longer in force.
                                                                                                                                       Instead, we impose the following conditions on the matrix H, the step-size γ(k), and
                                                                                                                                       the scaling function s(k):
                                                                                                                                           A4. rank(H) = m and z ∈   / span(H).                         P∞
                                                                                                                                           A5. (i) γ(0) = 1, γ(k) strictly monotonely decreases to zero, k=1 γ(k) = ∞; (ii)
                                                                                                                                                s(k) = sr γ(k) for some sr > 0; and (iii) 1 < β(k + 1) < β(k) for any k ≥ 0,
                                                                                                                                                                γ(k)
                                                                                                                                                where β(k) , γ(k+1)  .
                                                                                                                                              Remark 4.1. We give an example to show how to choose γ(k) to make A5 hold.
                                                                                                                                                        kδ                                         1
                                                                                                                                       Set γ(k) = (k+k00 )δ for some δ ∈ ( 12 , 1], where k0 = β(0)1/δ −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          . Then A5(i) holds since
                                                                                                                                                                P∞
                                                                                                                                       γ(0) = 1, γ(k) ↓ 0 and k=1 γ(k) = ∞. By the definition, we obtain that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 δ
                                                                                                                                                                          (k + k0 + 1)δ
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                 γ(k)                                     1
                                                                                                                                                        β(k) =          =               =            1+               > 1.
                                                                                                                                                               γ(k + 1)     (k + k0 )δ                  k + k0

                                                                                                                                       Then β(k) monotonely decreases and (1 + 1/k0 )δ = β(0). Thus, A5(iii) holds. We will
                                                                                                                                       specify the selection of sr upon convergence statements.
                                                                                                                                                             2                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                           Let h ∈ 0, λ2 (L)+λ N (L)
                                                                                                                                                                       and β(0) ∈ 1, 1−hλ 2 (L
                                                                                                                                                                                               ) . We then define

                                                                                                                                                   ρ̂h , 1 − hλ2 (L), M 0 (h, β(0)) , (1/2 + hd∗ )β(0) + 2hM2 (h, β(0)),
                                                                                                                                       (26)                       l                1m
                                                                                                                                                   K0 (h, β(0)) , M 0 (h, β(0)) − ,
                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                       where M2 (h, β(0)) is defined as follows:

                                                                                                                                       (27)
                                                                                                                                                            √              hλN (L)2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                            λN (L)                hλN (L)kHd k2
                                                                                                                                         M2 (h, β(0)) , β(0) mN                          +               kHd k∞ +
                                                                                                                                                                        2(1/β(0) − ρ̂h )   λmin (Fd )              1/β(0) − ρ̂h

                                                                                                                                       with Hd and Fd defined as in (9). We further define
                                                                                                                                                        √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                 2kzH k2                 hλN (L)kHd k2
                                                                                                                                       M1 (h, β(0)) ,     mN Cx (1 + hλN (L)) +              kHd k∞ +
                                                                                                                                                                                λmin (Fd )                1/β(0) − ρ̂h
                                                                                                                                                              √
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                              hkzH k2
                                                                                                                                          + kzH k∞ + λN (L)     mN Cx (1 + hβ(0)λN (L)) +                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                            1/β(0) − ρ̂h

                                                                                                                                       We are now ready to state the main result of this section.
                                                                                                                                          Proposition 4.2 (quantizer nonsaturation). Suppose A2, A4, and A5 hold.
                                                                                                                                       Consider Algorithm 1, where
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             1                              2            1
                                                                                                                                             β(0) ∈ 1,                , h ∈ 0, min                  ,              .
                                                                                                                                                        1 − hλ2 (L)                  λ2 (L) + λN (L) λmin (Fd )

                                                                                                                                       Then for any given K ≥ K0 (h, β(0)), the quantizer will never be saturated provided
                                                                                                                                       that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                           Cx + h(Cx kHd k∞ + kzH k∞ )
                                                                                                                                       (28)     sr > max                                , M1 (h, β(0))/M 2 (h, β(0))  .
                                                                                                                                                                      K + 12




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                           DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                          1207

                                                                                                                                            Proposition 4.2 establishes the nonsaturation of the uniform quantizer, for which
                                                                                                                                       the proof is given in Appendix C.1. Although the least-squares problem (2) seems
                                                                                                                                       like a special case of distributed optimization, the main challenge lies in the fact that
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       gradients of the quadratic function associated with each node cannot be assumed to
                                                                                                                                       be globally bounded a priori, a key technical assumption for the convergence analysis
                                                                                                                                       of distributed (sub)gradient optimization [31, 47]. This is because the gradient func-
                                                                                                                                       tion takes a linear form of the generated sequence x(k), which might be unbounded
                                                                                                                                       with inappropriate algorithmic parameters. Thus, the main effort of the proof lies in
                                                                                                                                       choosing the parameters and proving the boundedness of the generated sequence.
                                                                                                                                            Remark 4.3. We now discuss how to select the algorithm parameter h. For ease
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                       of understanding, suppose that khi k2 = 1 for any i ∈ V. Note that λmin1(Fd ) ≥ λN (L)+1
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                       by (12), and λ2 (L)+λ N (L)
                                                                                                                                                                   ≥ λN1(L) . Then from λN (L) ≤ 2d∗ [17, Lemma A.2] it follows
                                                                                                                                                        2           1              1
                                                                                                                                                                                        ≥ 2d∗1+1 . Thus, the sufficient condition
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                       that min λ2 (L)+λ        ,
                                                                                                                                                          N (L) λmin (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                             ≥ λN (L)+1
                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                       imposed on h holds if h satisifies h ∈ (0, 2d∗ +1 ), which merely requires the knowledge
                                                                                                                                       of the maximum degree of the communication graph G.
                                                                                                                                            Based on Proposition 4.2, we are able to show in the following theorem that the
                                                                                                                                       iterates generated by Algorithm 1 will asymptotically converge to the unique least-
                                                                                                                                       squares solution yLS ∗ . Its proof is shown in Appendix C.2.
                                                                                                                                           Theorem     4.4 (high data rate). Suppose A2, A4, and A5 hold. Let h ∈ (0,
                                                                                                                                                  2           1
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                       min λ2 (L)+λ      ,
                                                                                                                                                    N (L) λmin (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                     ) and β(0) ∈ (1, 1/ρ̂h ) with ρ̂h defined as in (26). Then
                                                                                                                                       for any given K ≥ K0 (h, β(0)), along Algorithm 1 there hold

                                                                                                                                       (29)                   lim xi (k) = yLS ∗ , (HT H)−1 HT z     ∀i ∈ V,
                                                                                                                                                             k→∞
                                                                                                                                                                              ∗
                                                                                                                                                                 kxi (k) − yLS k∞
                                                                                                                                       (30)                  sup                  <∞       ∀i ∈ V,
                                                                                                                                                             k≥1        γ(k)

                                                                                                                                       provided that sr satisfies (28).
                                                                                                                                            Remark 4.5. Note by Theorem 4.4 that a slow rate of convergence is obtained by
                                                                                                                                       Algorithm 1 with decreasing step-sizes for the least-squares solver, as opposed to the
                                                                                                                                       exponential convergence of the exact solver shown in Theorem 3.4 for Algorithm 1
                                                                                                                                       with a constant step-size. In fact, even with an unquantized communication channel,
                                                                                                                                       the primal domain algorithm cannot guarantee exact convergence with constant step-
                                                                                                                                       sizes for the distributed least-squares problem. It is, however, noted in [15, 40] that
                                                                                                                                       the exact convergence or even the exponential rate of convergence can be obtained
                                                                                                                                       using primal-dual domain algorithms. Besides, the distributed schemes in [28, 33]
                                                                                                                                       with gradient tracking can achieve exponential convergence for strongly convex opti-
                                                                                                                                       mization. By combining such schemes with our quantized protocol, we might be able
                                                                                                                                       to find the least-squares solution with finite data rates at an exponential rate. The
                                                                                                                                       randomized iterative least-squares solver proposed in [50], making the estimates ex-
                                                                                                                                       ponentially converge in mean square to the minimum Euclidean norm solution, might
                                                                                                                                       be amenable to a distributed implementation. This provides another possible avenue
                                                                                                                                       for designing a distributed quantized least-squares solver with an exponential conver-
                                                                                                                                       gence. We leave the problem of designing a least-squares solver with nondecreasing
                                                                                                                                       step-size for future research.
                                                                                                                                           Similar to Theorem 3.6 for the exact solver case, the following theorem shows
                                                                                                                                       that we can still design a distributed protocol for the least-squares solver to converge




                                                                                                                                              Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1208                  J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                       with 3-level quantizers, which uses the minimum number of quantization levels. For
                                                                                                                                       the theorem statement, we define the following set Ξ0K for any given K ≥ 1:
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                        (                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                    0                                      2            1
                                                                                                                                                  ΞK , (h, β(0)) : h ∈ 0, min                       ,           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                  λ2 (L) + λN (L) λmin (Fd )
                                                                                                                                       (31)                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                          β(0) ∈ 1, 1/(1 − hλ2 (L)) , M 0 (h, β(0)) ≤ K +
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                                            Theorem 4.6 (low data rate). Suppose A2, A4, and A5 hold. Then for any
                                                                                                                                       K ≥ 1, Ξ0K is nonempty, and for any (h, β(0)) ∈ Ξ0K , along Algorithm 1 with sr
                                                                                                                                       satisfying (28) there holds
                                                                                                                                                                     kxi (k) − yLS ∗ k∞
                                                                                                                                                                 sup                    <∞       ∀i ∈ V.
                                                                                                                                                                 k≥1        γ(k)
                                                                                                                                           The proof of Theorem 4.6 is given in Appendix C.3.
                                                                                                                                            Remark 4.7. Similar to Proposition 3.8, we can also give an explicit method for
                                                                                                                                       choosing algorithm parameters. To find a pair of parameters (h, β(0)) ∈ Ξ0K , we
                                                                                                                                       can apply the following procedure: (i) pick ν ∈ (0, 1); (ii) choose β(0) = βν (0) ,
                                                                                                                                              1                        ∗                2             1
                                                                                                                                       1−(1−ν)hλ2 (L) ; (iii) compute hK,ν , min{ λ2 (L)+λN (L) , λmin (Pd ) , ĥK,ν } with
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                          ĥK,ν , 2Kνλmin (Fd ) 2d∗ νλmin (Fd ) + (2K + 1)ν(1 − ν)λmin (Fd )λ2 (L)
                                                                                                                                                 √                                                        −1             λN (L)
                                                                                                                                             + 2 mN λN (L) 2νkHd k∞ + κN 2kHd k2 + λmin (Fd )                     , κN ,           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            λ2 (L)
                                                                                                                                       and select any h ∈ (0, h∗K,ν ). Meanwhile, the parameter ν ∈ (0, 1) can be used to tune
                                                                                                                                       the parameters β(0) and h. Additionally, such a selection method can find all feasible
                                                                                                                                       algorithm parameters.
                                                                                                                                           4.2. Numerical examples.
                                                                                                                                           Example 4. Let H, z be given as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                               1.7889 −1.0764              −0.2854
                                                                                                                                                            −1.0764 0.1903              1.2038 
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                      H =  0.4707
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                          1.1032  ;
                                                                                                                                                                          0.1008  , z = 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                            0.8356 −0.1716              0.7088 
                                                                                                                                                               0.5978 −1.6668              −0.9495

                                                                                                                                       then the unique least-squares solution y∗ , arg min ||z − Hy||2 = (0.1415, 0.6391)T .
                                                                                                                                       The nodes again communicate according to the graph shown in Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  26 0.85
                                                                                                                                            Validation of Theorem 4.4. Set h = 0.0853 and γ(k) = ( k+26              )     such
                                                                                                                                                            −1
                                                                                                                                       that β(0) ∈ (1, ρ̂h ). Hence, K(h, β(0)) = 870. We set K1 = 900, K2 = 300, and
                                                                                                                                       K3 = 1800, respectively. We set sr = 0.82 to meet (28) in all three cases. We then
                                                                                                                                       run Algorithm 1 with the quantization levels K1 , K2 , and K3 , respectively, while with
                                                                                                                                       the same parameters h, γ(k). The simulation results are displayed in Figure 9, which
                                                                                                                                       shows that the trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y||22 coincide in all three cases. It then
                                                                                                                                       implies that (i) once the sufficient condition of Theorem 4.4 is satisfied, increasing
                                                                                                                                       the data rate solely cannot speed up convergence; (ii) the condition in Theorem 4.4
                                                                                                                                       is sufficient for convergence but is not necessary. Figure 9 also shows the trajectory
                                                                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                                                       of ||x(k)−y
                                                                                                                                               γ(k)
                                                                                                                                                     ||∞
                                                                                                                                                         , which verifies the convergence rate described by (30).




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                           DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                                    1209


                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ||x − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 with K1 = 900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ||x − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 with K2 = 300
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                ||x − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 with K3 = 1800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ||x(k) − y∗ ||∞
                                                                                                                                                                    10-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     γ(k)




                                                                                                                                                                    10-4


                                                                                                                                                                           0   1       2     3       4     5    6         7      8        9      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Time                                 ×104



                                                                                                                                                     Fig. 9. Trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 under K = 300, 900, 1800.


                                                                                                                                                                                               Table 2
                                                                                                                                                                                           Parameter settings.

                                                                                                                                                                                           k0          δ            h                      sr
                                                                                                                                                                   K = 10                  120       0.85        0.0055                  0.9583
                                                                                                                                                                   K = 30                  36        0.75        0.0164                  0.6934
                                                                                                                                                                   K = 90                   9        0.55        0.0492                  0.6968


                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ||x − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 with K1 = 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ||x − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 with K2 = 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ||x − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 with K3 = 90


                                                                                                                                                                   10-2




                                                                                                                                                                   10-4
                                                                                                                                                                          0        1             2        3           4              5           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ×104


                                                                                                                                           Fig. 10. Trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2 for K = 10, 30, 90 with the algorithm parameters
                                                                                                                                       chosen in Table 2.


                                                                                                                                            Validation of Theorem 4.6. We set the quantization level K to be K1 = 10,
                                                                                                                                       K2 = 30, and K3 = 90, respectively. Then we utilize Remark 4.7 to select algorithm
                                                                                                                                                                              sr k0δ                          0
                                                                                                                                       parameters h and s(k) = sr γ(k) = (k+k        δ such that (h, β(0)) ∈ ΞK and sr satisfies
                                                                                                                                                                                  0)
                                                                                                                                       (28) for the three cases. By setting ν = 0.5, the derived parameters for the three
                                                                                                                                       cases are given in Table 2. Figure 10 shows the trajectories of ||x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ ||2
                                                                                                                                       for the three cases. It demonstrates the convergence of the algorithm with the chosen
                                                                                                                                       parameters, verifying Theorem 4.6. It also shows that with a higher data rate, the
                                                                                                                                       convergence could be faster if algorithm parameters are properly chosen.
                                                                                                                                            5. Conclusions. We have studied solving linear equations over a network sub-
                                                                                                                                       ject to digital node communications. We propose a node encoder/decoder pair, based
                                                                                                                                       on which a distributed quantized algorithm is designed. For the unique exact solution
                                                                                                                                       case, the proposed encoder/decoder powered algorithm drives each node state to the
                                                                                                                                       solution asymptotically at an exponential rate. For the unique least-squares solution
                                                                                                                                       case, the same encoder/decoder pair enables the algorithm to compute such a solu-
                                                                                                                                       tion with a properly selected time-varying step-size. A minimal data rate is shown
                                                                                                                                       to be enough for the desirable convergence for both cases. These results suggest the
                                                                                                                                       practical applicability of various network linear equation solvers in the literature.
                                                                                                                                            Though we have established the communication complexity to obtain an exact
                                                                                                                                       solution with a prescribed accuracy for any given quantization level, it remains an
                                                                                                                                       open question to determine the best selection of the quantization level. Another fu-
                                                                                                                                       ture direction is to investigate the primal-dual type algorithm or gradient tracking




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1210                 J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                       scheme for the network linear equation with a least-squares solution, under which
                                                                                                                                       the exponential rate of convergence might be obtainable with a constant step-size
                                                                                                                                       under quantized communications. It may also be of interest to investigate the asyn-
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       chronous scheme under uncoordinated step-sizes and quantization levels and explore
                                                                                                                                       convergence conditions of the proposed algorithm in the presence of (random or de-
                                                                                                                                       terministic) switching communication graphs.
                                                                                                                                           Appendix A. Preliminary lemma.
                                                                                                                                           Lemma A.1. Consider Algorithm 1, where bi (k) and x̂ij (k) are defined by the
                                                                                                                                       encoder (4) and the decoder (5), respectively. Define
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e(k)
                                                                                                                                       (A.1a)      ei (k) , xi (k) − bi (k), e(k) , col{e1 (k), . . . , eN (k)}, ε(k) ,        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s(k)
                                                                                                                                       (A.1b)      P(k) , ImN − h (L ⊗ Im + γ(k)Hd ) ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1N 1TN
                                                                                                                                       (A.1c)      η(k) , (D ⊗ Im ) x(k)/γ(k) with D , IN −                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                       where Hd is defined as in (9). Then the following hold with zH defined by (9):
                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                       (A.2a) x(k + 1) = P(k)x(k) + h s(k)L ⊗ Im ε(k) + γ(k)zH ,
                                                                                                                                                             γ(k) 
                                                                                                                                              η(k + 1) =              (ImN − hL ⊗ Im ) η(k)
                                                                                                                                                           γ(k + 1)
                                                                                                                                                             hs(k)                                       
                                                                                                                                       (A.2b)             +        L ⊗ Im ε(k) + hD ⊗ Im (zH − Hd x(k)) ,
                                                                                                                                                              γ(k)
                                                                                                                                                             s(k)                     
                                                                                                                                       (A.2c) ε(k + 1) =             θ(k) − QK (θ(k)) with
                                                                                                                                                           s(k + 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                    γ(k)                             
                                                                                                                                       (A.2d)      θ(k) , ImN + hL ⊗ Im ε(k) − h          L ⊗ Im η(k) + Hd x(k) − zH .
                                                                                                                                                                                     s(k)
                                                                                                                                           Proof. Since j ∈ Ni is equivalent to i ∈ Nj , by using x̂ij (k) = bj (k) (equation
                                                                                                                                       (7)) and ei (k) = xi (k) − bi (k), we have the following:
                                                                                                                                                             X                       X                    
                                                                                                                                                                  x̂ij (k) − bi (k) =       bj (k) − bi (k)
                                                                                                                                                           j∈Ni                        j∈Ni
                                                                                                                                       (A.3)                      X                                          
                                                                                                                                                              =          (xj (k) − xi (k)) − (ej (k) − ei (k)) .
                                                                                                                                                                  j∈Ni

                                                                                                                                       Then we obtain a variant of (6):

                                                                                                                                       (A.4)    x(k + 1) = x(k) − hL ⊗ Im x(k) + hL ⊗ Im e(k) − hγ(k) (Hd x(k) − zH ) .

                                                                                                                                       Hence (A.2a) holds by e(k) = s(k)ε(k) and the definition of P(k) in (A.1b). Note
                                                                                                                                       that DL = L and D(IN − hL) = (IN − hL)D. Then by multiplying both sides of
                                                                                                                                       (A.4) on the left with (D⊗I m)
                                                                                                                                                               γ(k+1) , using e(k) = s(k)ε(k) and η(k) = (D ⊗ Im ) x(k)/γ(k),
                                                                                                                                       we obtain (A.2b). From (4) it follows that
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                  x(k + 1) − b(k)
                                                                                                                                       (A.5)               b(k + 1) =s(k)QK                         + b(k).
                                                                                                                                                                                       s(k)
                                                                                                                                       By subtracting b(k) from both sides of (A.4), using (A.1a) and L ⊗ Im x(k) = L ⊗
                                                                                                                                       Im (D ⊗ Im ) x(k) = γ(k)L ⊗ Im η(k), we obtain that




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                        DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                               1211
                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                       x(k + 1) − b(k) = ImN + hL ⊗ Im e(k) − hL ⊗ Im x(k) − hγ(k)(Hd x(k) − hzH )
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (A.2d)
                                                                                                                                          = s(k) ImN + hL ⊗ Im ε(k) − hγ(k) L ⊗ Im η(k) + Hd x(k) − zH          s(k)θ(k).
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                           =
                                                                                                                                       Recalling that e(k + 1) = x(k + 1) − b(k + 1) together with (A.5), we then have that
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                               x(k + 1) − b(k)                            
                                                                                                                                       e(k + 1) = x(k + 1) − b(k) − s(k)QK                       = s(k) θ(k) − QK (θ(k)) .
                                                                                                                                                                                    s(k)

                                                                                                                                       Hence, by dividing both sides of the above equation by s(k + 1), we obtain (A.2c).
                                                                                                                                           Appendix B. Proof of results stated in section 3.
                                                                                                                                           B.1. Proof of Proposition 3.1. We first give a reformulation of Algorithm 1
                                                                                                                                       based on Lemma A.1. Define
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w(k)
                                                                                                                                       (B.1)      wi (k) , xi (k) − y∗ , w(k) = x(k) − 1N ⊗ Im y∗ , and ω(k) ,            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s(k)

                                                                                                                                       By subtracting 1N ⊗ Im y∗ from both sides of (A.2a), by using γ(k) ≡ 1 and (A.1b),
                                                                                                                                       we obtain that

                                                                                                                                       (B.2)   w(k + 1) = w(k) − h (L ⊗ Im ) x(k) − h(Hd x(k) − zH ) + hs(k)L ⊗ Im ε(k).

                                                                                                                                       From L1N = 0N it follows that

                                                                                                                                       (B.3)       L ⊗ Im w(k) = L ⊗ Im x(k) − (L1N ⊗ Im ) y∗ = L ⊗ Im x(k).

                                                                                                                                       Recall that hTi y∗ = zi for each i ∈ V. Then

                                                                                                                                       (B.4)           hi h>              >            ∗        >
                                                                                                                                                           i wi (k) = hi hi (xi (k) − y ) = hi hi xi (k) − hi zi .

                                                                                                                                       This incorporated with (B.2) and (B.3) produces
                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                       (B.5)      w(k + 1) = ImN − h(L ⊗ Im + Hd ) w(k) + hs(k)L ⊗ Im ε(k),

                                                                                                                                       where Hd is defined by (9). Dividing both sides of the above equation by s(k + 1),
                                                                                                                                       using s(k) = s(0)αk and ω(k) = w(k)
                                                                                                                                                                       s(k) , we obtain that

                                                                                                                                       (B.6)                ω(k + 1) = α−1 Ph ω(k) + α−1 hL ⊗ Im ε(k),

                                                                                                                                       where Ph , ImN − hFd with Fd = L ⊗ Im + Hd . Note by γ(k) ≡ 1, (A.1c), and (B.3)
                                                                                                                                       that
                                                                                                                                               L ⊗ Im η(k) = L ⊗ Im (D ⊗ Im ) x(k) = L ⊗ Im x(k) = L ⊗ Im w(k).
                                                                                                                                       The from (A.2c), (A.2d), (B.4), and ω(k) = w(k)
                                                                                                                                                                                  s(k) it follows that

                                                                                                                                                             ε(k + 1) = α−1 θ(k) − QK (θ(k)) ,
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                       (B.7)
                                                                                                                                       (B.8)                 θ(k) , (ImN + hL ⊗ Im ) ε(k) − hFd ω(k).

                                                                                                                                       Therefore, Algorithm 1 can be described by (B.6), (B.7), and (B.8).
                                                                                                                                           The proof of nonsaturation of the uniform quantizer is equivalent to showing that
                                                                                                                                       for any k ≥ 0, θ(k) defined by (B.8) satisfies kθ(k)k∞ < K + 21 . The proof will use
                                                                                                                                       induction. So we begin by showing the quantizer is not saturated at k = 0.




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1212                 J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                           Note that bi (0) = 0 for each i ∈ V. Then by (A.1a), we obtain e(0) = x(0) and
                                                                                                                                       ε(0) = x(0)/s(0). Then by A2, we have
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                  kx(0)k∞
                                                                                                                                       (B.9)                      kε(0)k∞ =               ≤ Cx /s(0).
                                                                                                                                                                                    s(0)
                                                                                                                                       By using the definitions ω(0) = w(0)/s(0), ε(0) = x(0)/s(0), and (B.3), we obtain
                                                                                                                                       that L ⊗ Im ω(0) = L ⊗ Im ε(0). Thus, by using (B.4) and (B.8), one obtains

                                                                                                                                                   θ(0) = (ImN + hL ⊗ Im ) ε(0) − h (L ⊗ Im + Hd ) ω(0)
                                                                                                                                                        = ε(0) − hHd w(0)/s(0) = ε(0) − h(Hd x(0) − zH )/s(0).

                                                                                                                                       As a result, by A2, (B.9), and (11), we have the following:
                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                                                                                      kθ(0)k∞ ≤ kε(0)k∞ +       (kHd k∞ kx(0)k∞ + kzH k∞ )
                                                                                                                                                                           s(0)
                                                                                                                                                                 (1 + hkHd k∞ )Cx + hkzH k∞         1
                                                                                                                                                               ≤                             <K+ .
                                                                                                                                                                            s(0)                    2
                                                                                                                                       Hence, the quantizer is unsaturated at k = 0. Now for the induction, we assume that
                                                                                                                                       the quantizer is not saturated at k = 0, . . . , p. Then by (B.7) we have that
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                       (B.10)                              sup     kε(k)k∞ ≤           .
                                                                                                                                                                      1≤k≤p+1                       2α

                                                                                                                                       We proceed to show that the quantizer is unsaturated for k = p + 1.
                                                                                                                                          From (B.6) it follows that
                                                                                                                                                                           p+1                             p
                                                                                                                                                    ω(p + 1) = α−1 Ph             ω(0) + α−1 h α−1 Ph            L ⊗ Im ε(0)
                                                                                                                                       (B.11)                              p−1
                                                                                                                                                                           X               i
                                                                                                                                                                 + α−1 h          α−1 Ph        L ⊗ Im ε(p − i).
                                                                                                                                                                           i=0

                                                                                                                                       We now estimate the three terms on the right-hand side of (B.11) separately. Note
                                                                                                                                       that for any given h > 0, the eigenvalues of Ph = ImN −hFd are sorted in an ascending
                                                                                                                                       order as 1 − hλmax (Fd ) ≤ · · · ≤ 1 − hλmin (Fd ), and there exists a unitary matrix
                                                                                                                                       U such that UT Ph U = diag 1 − hλmax (Fd ), . . . , 1 − hλmin (Fd ) , Λ. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                         k       T k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                       kΛk2 = max {|1 − hλmin (Fd )|, |1     − hλ max (F d )|} and (P h )  = UΛU     = UΛk UT .
                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                       Since h ∈ 0, λmin (Fd )+λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                            , by using [17, Lemma 3.1], we obtain that kΛk2 =
                                                                                                                                       1 − hλmin (Fd ) = ρh . Thus,

                                                                                                                                       (B.12)                     kPh kk2 ≤ kUk2 kΛkk2 kUT k2 ≤ ρkh .

                                                                                                                                           By using ω(0) = (x(0) − 1N ⊗ Im y∗ )/s(0), L1N = 0N , hTi y∗ = zi , and the
                                                                                                                                       definition of zh in (9), we obtain that
                                                                                                                                                             Ph x(0) ImN − hL ⊗ Im − hHd
                                                                                                                                                     Ph ω(0) =      −                           1N ⊗ Im y∗
                                                                                                                                                              s(0)                s(0)
                                                                                                                                                             Ph x(0) 1N ⊗ Im y∗           zH
                                                                                                                                       (B.13)              =        −               +h        .
                                                                                                                                                              s(0)         s(0)          s(0)
                                                                                                                                                             PN
                                                                                                                                       Note by A1 that HT H = i=1 hi hTi is positive definite. Then the following holds:




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                            DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                                          1213

                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                    !−1 N                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !−1 N
                                                                                                                                                                 X                     X                          X                    X
                                                                                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                                                                                     y =                  hi hTi                hi hTi y∗ =                hi hTi              zi hi .
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                 i=1                      i=1                     i=1                    i=1

                                                                                                                                       This combined with (B.13) produces
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !−1 N
                                                                                                                                                              Ph x(0) 1N ⊗ Im                       hzHX                  X
                                                                                                                                                    Ph ω(0) =        −                                   .    hi hTi                 zi hi +
                                                                                                                                                               s(0)     s(0)   i=1         i=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    s(0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   √
                                                                                                                                       Then by using (B.12), k1N ⊗ Im k∞ = 1, A2, and kxk∞ ≤ kxk2 ≤ mkxk∞ for any
                                                                                                                                       x ∈ Rm , we have
                                                                                                                                       (B.14)
                                                                                                                                                    p+1                                                √
                                                                                                                                         k α−1 Ph      ω(0)k2 ≤ α−(p+1) kPph k2 kPh ω(0)k2 ≤ α−(p+1) ρph mN kPh ω(0)k∞
                                                                                                                                                         √    
                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                       !−1    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                              α−(p+1) ρph mN              X                 X
                                                                                                                                            ≤                   ρh Cx +         hi hTi           zi hi   + hkzH k∞ 
                                                                                                                                                   s(0)                    i=1               i=1
                                                                                                                                                                                           2           ∞
                                                                                                                                              √
                                                                                                                                                mN Mhx −p p
                                                                                                                                            ≤            α ρh with Mhx defined in (10),
                                                                                                                                                αs(0)
                                                                                                                                       where in the last inequality we used kA−1 k2 = 1/λmin (A) for an invertible matrix A,
                                                                                                                                             PN             PN
                                                                                                                                       and k i=1 xi k∞ ≤ i=1 kxi k∞ ≤ N maxi kxi k∞ = N kcol{x1 , · · · , xN }k∞ . For the
                                                                                                                                       second term of (B.11), from (B.12), (B.9), and kLk2 = λN (L) it follows that
                                                                                                                                                                     p
                                                                                                                                                      kα−1 h α−1 Ph L ⊗ Im ε(0)k2
                                                                                                                                                                                              √
                                                                                                                                       (B.15)                             p                hCx mN            ρ p
                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                             −(p+1)
                                                                                                                                                          ≤α        hkPh k2 kLk2 kε(0)k2 ≤           λN (L)        .
                                                                                                                                                                                             αs(0)            α
                                                                                                                                       Similarly, for the last term of (B.11), by using
                                                                                                                                                 p−1                                p−1                           p−1                                   p
                                                                                                                                                 X                   i             X                i           X     ρh i            1 − (ρh /α)
                                                                                                                                                        α−1 Ph                  ≤          α−1 Ph             ≤                      =               ,
                                                                                                                                                  i=0                               i=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i=0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             α             1 − ρh /α
                                                                                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                                       and by (B.10) we have that
                                                                                                                                                                         p−1
                                                                                                                                                                −1
                                                                                                                                                                         X                i
                                                                                                                                                            α        h          α−1 Ph         L ⊗ Im ε(p − i)
                                                                                                                                                                         i=0                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                   √                              p−1
                                                                                                                                                                  h mN                            X          i
                                                                                                                                                                ≤       kLk2 sup kε(k)k∞              α−1 Ph
                                                                                                                                                                    α          1≤k≤p+1            i=0                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                   √
                                                                                                                                                                  h mN λN (L)        ρh  p 
                                                                                                                                                                ≤                 1−            .
                                                                                                                                                                   2α(α − ρh )         α
                                                                                                                                           Thus, by using (B.11) and adding up the bounds of (B.14)–(B.1), we have that
                                                                                                                                                 kω(p + 1)k∞ ≤ kω(p + 1)k2
                                                                                                                                                       √              √                                        
                                                                                                                                                      h mN λN (L)       mN Mhx         hCx            hλN (L)  ρh p
                                                                                                                                                   ≤                +               +       λN (L) −
                                                                                                                                       (B.16)          2α(α − ρh )      α      s(0)    s(0)          2(α − ρh )   α
                                                                                                                                                      √                                             √
                                                                                                                                                        mN         Mhx + hCx λN (L) hλN (L)          h mN λN (L)
                                                                                                                                                   ≤        max                     ,              ≤              ,
                                                                                                                                                        α                s(0)         2(α − ρh )      2α(α − ρh )




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1214                  J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                       where the last inequality follows by (11). This together with kxk∞ ≤ kxk2 , (10),
                                                                                                                                       (B.8), and (B.10) leads to
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                          kθ(p + 1)k∞ ≤ kImN + hL ⊗ Im k∞ kε(p + 1)k∞ + hkFd k2 kω(p + 1)k2
                                                                                                                                                            √
                                                                                                                                               1 + 2hd∗   h2 mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )                        1    1
                                                                                                                                            ≤           +                        = M (α, h) ≤ K(α, h) + ≤ K + .
                                                                                                                                                  2α           2α(α − ρh )                              2    2
                                                                                                                                       As a result, when k = p+1, the quantizer is also unsaturated. Therefore, by induction,
                                                                                                                                       we conclude that if a (2K + 1)-levels uniform quantizer is applied, then the quantizer
                                                                                                                                       will never be saturated.
                                                                                                                                           B.2. Proof of Theorem 3.4. Since the conditions required by Proposition 3.1
                                                                                                                                       are the same as those used in Theorem 3.4, the quantizer will never be saturated
                                                                                                                                       by Proposition 3.1. Then by (B.7) we conclude that supk≥1 kε(k)k∞ ≤ 1/2α, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 √
                                                                                                                                                                                                           mN λN (L)
                                                                                                                                       hence (B.16) holds for any p ≥ 0. Thus, we obtain that kω(k)k2 ≤ h 2α(α−ρh)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <∞
                                                                                                                                       for any k ≥ 1. This combined with the definitions w(k) = x(k) − 1N ⊗ y∗ and
                                                                                                                                       w(k) = s(0)αk ω(k) proves (17). Hence (16) holds by letting k → ∞.
                                                                                                                                            B.3. Proof of Theorem 3.6. By using ρh = 1−hλmin (Fd ) and M (α, h) defined
                                                                                                                                       in (10), there holds
                                                                                                                                                                                 √
                                                                                                                                                                    1 + 2hd∗   h2 mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                       (B.17)            M (α, h) =          +                          .
                                                                                                                                                                       2α      2α α − (1 − hλmin (Fd ))
                                                                                                                                                                     √
                                                                                                                                                                ∗
                                                                                                                                       Note that limh→0 1+2hd
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                     λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                              + h mN2λmin (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                      = 12 . Then for any given K ≥ 1 there
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                       √
                                                                                                                                                                                           ∗ ∗
                                                                                                                                       exists h∗ ∈ (0, λmin (Fd )+λ
                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                    max (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                              ) such that 1+2h
                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                 +h
                                                                                                                                                                                                  mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2λmin (Fd )        ≤ K. By
                                                                                                                                                                                                √
                                                                                                                                                                             ∗     1+2h∗ d∗   h∗ mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                       (B.17) it follows that limα→1 M (α, h ) =      2     +      2λmin (Fd )        ≤ K, and
                                                                                                                                                              ∗         ∗                            ∗    ∗
                                                                                                                                       hence there exists α ∈ (1 − h λmin (Fd ), 1) such that M (α , h ) < K + 12 . Thus,
                                                                                                                                       (α∗ , h∗ ) ∈ ΞK , and hence ΞK is nonempty.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                            For any (α, h) ∈ ΞK , from (18) it follows that h ∈ 0, λmin (Fd )+λ   max (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,α ∈
                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                       (1 − hλmin (Fd ), 1), and M (α, h) < K + 2 . Then K(α, h) , M (α, h − 2 ≤ K
                                                                                                                                       together with Theorem 3.4 completes the proof.
                                                                                                                                           B.4. Proof of Proposition 3.8 . It is noticed by ρhν = 1 − hν λmin (Fd ) that
                                                                                                                                       αν − ρhν = νhν λmin (Fd ) > 0. Then by the definition M (α, h) in (10), we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                √
                                                                                                                                                                 1 + 2hν d∗                  hν mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                         M (αν , hν ) =                              +
                                                                                                                                                        2 (1 − (1 − ν)hν λmin (Fd )) 2νλmin (Fd ) (1 − (1 − ν)hν λmin (Fd ))
                                                                                                                                                                                     √
                                                                                                                                                        νλmin (Fd )(1 + 2hν d∗ ) + hν mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                      =                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                               2νλmin (Fd ) (1 − (1 − ν)hν λmin (Fd ))

                                                                                                                                       Then for any hν < ĥK,ν , by the definition of ĥK,ν in (19), there holds M (αν , hν ) <
                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                       K + 21 . Note by hν ∈ 0, λmin (Fd )+λ max (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                        and the definition of ΞK in (18), we
                                                                                                                                       conclude that (αν , hν ) ∈ ΞK .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                           For any (α, h) ∈ ΞK , there hold α ∈ (ρh , 1) and h ∈ 0, λmin (Fd )+λ   max (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               by
                                                                                                                                                               1−α
                                                                                                                                       (18). Define ν , 1 − hλmin (Fd ) . Then by ρh = 1 − hλmin (Fd ) it is seen that ν ∈ (0, 1)
                                                                                                                                       and α = 1 − (1 − ν)hλmin (Fd ). It is noticed that M (α, h) < K + 12 is equivalent to
                                                                                                                                       h < ĥK,ν0 with ĥK,ν defined in (19), and hence h ∈ (0, h∗K,ν ). This completes the
                                                                                                                                       proof of Proposition 3.8.




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                            DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                             1215

                                                                                                                                           B.5. Proof of Theorem 3.10. For any given K ≥ 1, define
                                                                                                                                                   ΓK , α : α = 1 − (1 − ν)hλmin (Fd ), ν ∈ (0, 1), h ∈ (0, h∗K,ν ) .
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                       (B.18)
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                       By h∗K,ν ≤ ĥK,ν and (19), we know that for any h ∈ (0, h∗K,ν )
                                                                                                                                                                             √                        −1
                                                                                                                                                           h ≤ 2Kνλmin (Fd ) mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )          .
                                                                                                                                       Because (1 − ν)ν ≤ 14 for any ν ∈ (0, 1), then for any α = 1 − (1 − ν)hλmin (Fd ), ν ∈
                                                                                                                                       (0, 1), h ∈ (0, h∗K,ν ), the following holds:
                                                                                                                                                        2K(1 − ν)νλ2min (Fd )       Kλ2min (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                   α>1− √                     ≥1− √                    .
                                                                                                                                                          mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )    2 mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                       Thus, it holds for fixed K that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kλ2       (F )
                                                                                                                                                               inf α∈ΓK α         1 − 2√mN λ min   d
                                                                                                                                                                                             N (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                            ≥                             ,
                                                                                                                                                              Kλ2 (Fd )                    Kλ2min (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                     exp − 2√mN λ min
                                                                                                                                                                   (L)λ (F )
                                                                                                                                                                                exp   −  √
                                                                                                                                                                                        2 mN λ (L)λ     (F )
                                                                                                                                                                      N     max      d                                    N      max    d

                                                                                                                                                                    1−x
                                                                                                                                       which together with limx↓0 exp(−x) = 1 produces
                                                                                                                                                                                             inf α∈ΓK α
                                                                                                                                       (B.19)                   lim inf                                                 ≥ 1.
                                                                                                                                                                 N →∞                        d  Kλ2      (F )
                                                                                                                                                                          exp − 2√mN λ min
                                                                                                                                                                                        (L)λ        N       max (Fd )

                                                                                                                                           From (19) it follows that
                                                                                                                                                             √                                                       −1
                                                                                                                                       ĥK,ν ≥2Kνλmin (Fd ) mN λN (L)λmax (Fd ) + 2λmin (Fd )d∗ + (2K + 1)λ2min (Fd )    ,
                                                                                                                                       which combined with inf h∈(0,h∗K,ν ) α ≤ 1 − (1 − ν)ĥK,ν λmin (Fd ) implies that
                                                                                                                                                                            maxν∈(0,1) 2ν(1 − ν)Kλ2min (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                inf α ≤ 1 −                  √
                                                                                                                                            α∈ΓK              2λmin (Fd )d∗ + mN λN (L)λmax (Fd ) + (2K + 1)λ2min (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                             Kλ2min (Fd )/2
                                                                                                                                                     =1−                             √                                             .
                                                                                                                                                              2λmin (Fd )d∗ +            mN λN (L)λmax (Fd ) + (2K + 1)λ2min (Fd )
                                                                                                                                       Then we have that for any given K ≥ 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kλ2       (F )
                                                                                                                                                               inf α∈ΓK α         1 − 2√mN λ min  d
                                                                                                                                                                                            N (L)λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                            ≤                            
                                                                                                                                                              Kλ2 (Fd )                    Kλ2 (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                     exp − 2√mN λ min
                                                                                                                                                                   (L)λ (F )
                                                                                                                                                                                exp − 2√mN λ min
                                                                                                                                                                                               (L)λ    (F )
                                                                                                                                                                      N      max         d                                N      max        d

                                                                                                                                                                                    Kλ2min (Fd )/2
                                                                                                                                                            1− √   mN λN (L)λmax (Fd )+2λmin (Fd )d∗ +(2K+1)λ2min (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                       ×                                     Kλ2    (F )/2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                                            1 − √mN λ min
                                                                                                                                                                                       (L)λ     N     max (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                 √
                                                                                                                                                                      1 /( N +c2 )
                                                                                                                                       This together with limN →∞ 1−c1−c   √
                                                                                                                                                                          / N
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1−x
                                                                                                                                                                                   = 1 and limx↓0 exp(−x) = 0 gives
                                                                                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                                                                                             inf α∈ΓK α
                                                                                                                                       (B.20)                   lim sup                                                 ≤ 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                             d  Kλ2       (F )
                                                                                                                                                                 N →∞     exp − 2√mN λ min
                                                                                                                                                                                        (L)λ        N       max (Fd )

                                                                                                                                       Using Theorem 3.6(i) and (B.18), we have the following:
                                                                                                                                                      inf     α=           inf                 α = inf              inf        α = inf α.
                                                                                                                                                   (α,h)∈ΞK        (α,h)∈∪ν∈(0,1) ΞK,ν                  ν∈(0,1) (α,h)∈ΞK,ν             α∈ΓK

                                                                                                                                       This combined with (B.19) and (B.20) produces (21).




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1216                 J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                           Appendix C. Proof of results stated in section 4.
                                                                                                                                           C.1. Proof of Proposition 4.2. Based on Lemma A.1, by using s(k) = sr γ(k)
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                   γ(k)
                                                                                                                                       and β(k) = γ(k+1) , we have that
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                       (C.1)      x(k + 1) = P(k)x(k) + hγ(k) sr L ⊗ Im ε(k) + zH ,
                                                                                                                                                  η(k + 1) = β(k) (ImN − hL ⊗ Im ) η(k)
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                       (C.2)      + hsr L ⊗ Im ε(k) + hD ⊗ Im (zH − Hd x(k)) ,
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                       (C.3)      ε(k + 1) = β(k) θ(k) − QK (θ(k)) ,
                                                                                                                                                  θ(k) , ImN + hL ⊗ Im ε(k) − hs−1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                       (C.4)                                      r  L ⊗ Im η(k) + Hd x(k) − zH ,

                                                                                                                                       where ε(k), P(k), and η(k) are defined in (A.1a), (A.1b), and (A.1c), respectively
                                                                                                                                           The proof of nonsaturation of the uniform quantizer is equivalent to showing that
                                                                                                                                       for any k ≥ 0, θ(k) defined by (C.4) satisfies kθ(k)k∞ < K + 12 . Again, we use an
                                                                                                                                       induction proof. So we begin by showing the quantizer is not saturated at k = 0.
                                                                                                                                           Recalling that γ(0) = 1, bi (0) = 0 for each i ∈ V, we obtain e(0) = x(0) and
                                                                                                                                       ε(0) = x(0)/sr . Then by using L ⊗ Im η(0) = L ⊗ Im x(0) and (C.4), we obtain that
                                                                                                                                       θ(0) = x(0)/sr − hs−1
                                                                                                                                                           r (Hd x(0) − zH ) . Then from A2, and (28) it follows that

                                                                                                                                                                      Cx + h(Cx kHd k∞ + kzH k∞ )    1
                                                                                                                                                        kθ(0)k∞ ≤                                 <K+ .
                                                                                                                                                                                  sr                 2
                                                                                                                                       Hence, the quantizer is unsaturated at k = 0 . Next, for the induction, we assume
                                                                                                                                       that the quantizer is unsaturated for k = 0, . . . , p. Then by (C.3) and A5, there holds

                                                                                                                                                                           β(k)   β(0)
                                                                                                                                       (C.5)               kε(k)k∞ ≤            ≤         ∀k : 1 ≤ k ≤ p + 1.
                                                                                                                                                                            2      2
                                                                                                                                           We aim to show that the quantizer is unsaturated for k = p + 1. Define

                                                                                                                                       (C.6)   Γ(k, k + 1) , ImN and Γ(k1 , k2 ) , P(k1 )P(k1 − 1) . . . P(k2 ) ∀k1 ≥ k2 ≥ 0.

                                                                                                                                       Then from (C.1) and γ(0) = 1 it follows that

                                                                                                                                                x(p + 1) = Γ(p, 0)x(0) + hsr Γ(p, 1)L ⊗ Im ε(0)
                                                                                                                                                                    p                                      p
                                                                                                                                       (C.7)                        X                                      X
                                                                                                                                                            + hsr         γ(i)Γ(p, i + 1)L ⊗ Im ε(i) + h         γ(i)Γ(p, i + 1)zH .
                                                                                                                                                                    i=1                                    i=0

                                                                                                                                           We now estimate the bound of x(p + 1). By Fd = L ⊗ Im + Hd , one obtains

                                                                                                                                       min{1, γ(k)}xT Fd x ≤ xT (L ⊗ Im + γ(k)Hd ) x ≤ max{1, γ(k)}xT Fd x ∀x ∈ RmN .

                                                                                                                                       Notice that min{1, γ(k)} = γ(k) and max{1, γ(k)} = 1 by 0 < γ(k) ≤ 1. Thus,
                                                                                                                                       for the matrix L ⊗ Im + γ(k)Hd , the smallest eigenvalue is greater than or equal to
                                                                                                                                       γ(k)λmin (Fd ) while the largest eigenvalue is smaller than or equal to λmax (Fd ). Then
                                                                                                                                       by P(k) defined in (A.1b), the eigenvalues of P(k) can be sorted in an ascending order
                                                                                                                                       as 1 − hλmax (Fd ) ≤ λ1 (P(k)) ≤ · · · ≤ λmN (P(k)) ≤ 1 − hγ(k)λmin (Fd ). Thus, for
                                                                                                                                       any k ≥ 0, kP(k)k2 ≤ max{ 1 − hγ(k)λmin (Fd ) , 1 − hλmax (Fd ) }. Then by recalling
                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                       that 0 < h < λmin (Fd )+λmax (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                          and γ(k) ≤ 1, the following holds:

                                                                                                                                                     kP(k)k2 ≤ 1 − hγ(k)λmin (Fd ) ≤ exp (−hγ(k)λmin (Fd )) ,




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                                DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                      1217

                                                                                                                                       where the last inequality holds since for any x ≥ 0, 1 − x ≤ exp(−x). Then from (C.6)
                                                                                                                                       it follows that for any k1 ≥ k2 ≥ 0,
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                               X
                                                                                                                                                            kΓ(k1 , k2 )k2 < exp −hλmin (Fd )      γ(k) .
                                                                                                                                                                                                            k=k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  √
                                                                                                                                       Also, using (C.5), (C.7), A2, kxk∞ ≤ kxk2 ≤                    mkxk∞ for any x ∈ Rm , and x(0) =
                                                                                                                                       sr ε(0), we obtain that
                                                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                                                                                                               X
                                                                                                                                                kx(p + 1)k2 ≤ hsr kLk2               γ(i)kΓ(p, i + 1)k2 kε(i)k2 + kΓ(p, 0)k2 kx(0)k2
                                                                                                                                                                               i=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                                                                                                                    X
                                                                                                                                                     + hkΓ(p, 1)k2 kLk2 kx(0)k2 + hkzH k2                 γ(i)kΓ(p, i + 1)k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    i=1
                                                                                                                                       (C.8)                                                  p                                      p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                     √                                        X                                      X
                                                                                                                                                 ≤       mN (1 + hλN (L))Cx + hkzH k2               γ(i) exp −hλmin (Fd )                 γ(k)
                                                                                                                                                                                              i=0                                 k=i+1
                                                                                                                                                               √           p                        p
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                       hsr β(0) mN λN (L) X                         X
                                                                                                                                                     +                        γ(i) exp −hλmin (Fd )   γ(k) .
                                                                                                                                                                2         i=1                                      k=i+1

                                                                                                                                       Since hγ(k) ≤ 1/λmin (Fd ) for any k ≥ 0, the following holds for any k ≥ 0 :
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                  λmin (Fd )        2
                                                                                                                                                            hγ(k) ≤ 2 hγ(k) −                (hγ(k)) .
                                                                                                                                                                                      2

                                                                                                                                       Now observe that for any x ∈ (0, 1), x − x2 /2 < 1 − exp(−x). Then we have the
                                                                                                                                       following sequence of inequalities:
                                                                                                                                            p                                  p
                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                          X                                    X
                                                                                                                                              hλmin (Fd )γ(i) exp −hλmin (Fd )    γ(k)
                                                                                                                                         i=k1                                             k=i+1
                                                                                                                                                 p                                                                p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                 X                                            2                  X
                                                                                                                                            ≤2               hλmin (Fd )γ(i) − hλmin (Fd )γ(i) /2 exp −hλmin (Fd )   γ(i)
                                                                                                                                                 i=k1                                                                                k=i+1
                                                                                                                                                 p                                                                 p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                 X                                                                 X
                                                                                                                                            ≤2           (1 − exp (−hλmin (Fd )γ(i))) exp −hλmin (Fd )                     γ(k)
                                                                                                                                                 i=k1                                                              k=i+1
                                                                                                                                                 p                                   p                           p
                                                                                                                                                         "                                                             !#
                                                                                                                                                 X                                  X                          X
                                                                                                                                            =2               exp − hλmin (Fd )           γ(k) − exp −hλmin (Fd )   γ(k)   ≤ 2.
                                                                                                                                                 i=k1                            k=i+1                                     k=i

                                                                                                                                       Using this in (C.8) yields

                                                                                                                                       (C.9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 √
                                                                                                                                                                √                         sr β(0) mN λN (L)    2kzH k2
                                                                                                                                          kx(p + 1)k2 ≤             mN Cx (1 + hλN (L)) +                   +            , Mx .
                                                                                                                                                                                               λmin (Fd )     λmin (Fd )
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1N
                                                                                                                                          Since L is symmetric, we can define an orthogonal matrix T , ( √    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                , φ2 , . . . , φN ),
                                                                                                                                                                                              −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                       where Lφi = λi (L)φi , i = 2, . . . , N . Let η̃(k) = T ⊗ Im η(k) = TT ⊗ Im  η(k)
                                                                                                                                       and decompose it as η̃(k) = (η̃1 (k)T , η̃2 (k)T )T with η̃1 (k) = √1N 1TN ⊗ Im η(k)




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1218                 J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON

                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                       and η̃2 (k) = TT2 ⊗ Im η(k), where T2 = (φ2 , . . . , φN ). Then η̃1 (k) = 0m by
                                                                                                                                       η(k) = (D ⊗ Im ) x(k)         T       T
                                                                                                                                                           γ(k) and 1N D = 0m . Then by multiplying both sides of (C.2) with
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                       T2 ⊗ Im from the left, and noting TT2 L = diag {λ2 (L), . . . , λN (L)} TT2 , we have that

                                                                                                                                                 η̃2 (k + 1) = β(k)hsr TT2 L ⊗ Im ε(k)
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                               + β(k) diag {1 − hλ2 (L), . . . , 1 − hλN (L)} ⊗Im η̃2 (k)
                                                                                                                                                                       |               {z                   }
                                                                                                                                                                                                Dh

                                                                                                                                                                         TT2 D ⊗ Im
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                       (C.10)                + β(k)h                       (zH − Hd x(k)) .

                                                                                                                                       Thus, there holds
                                                                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                η̃2 (p + 1) = Dp+1
                                                                                                                                                               h   ⊗ I m   η̃2 (0)   β(k)
                                                                                                                                                                                        k=0
                                                                                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                                                                                   X                           p
                                                                                                                                                                                              Y
                                                                                                                                       (C.11)                 +h         Dkh TT2 D ⊗ Im                β(i) (zH − Hd x(p − k))
                                                                                                                                                                   k=0                          i=p−k
                                                                                                                                                                     Xp                            Yp
                                                                                                                                                                            Dkh TT2 L ⊗ Im
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                              + hsr                                         β(i)ε(p − k).
                                                                                                                                                                      k=0                           i=p−k

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 1T
                                                                                                                                       Note that (T2 ⊗ Im )η̃2 (k) = T2 TT2 ⊗ Im η(k) = (IN − NN N ⊗ Im )η(k) = η(k).
                                                                                                                                       Then by multiplying both sides of (C.11) on the left with (T2 ⊗ Im ), there holds
                                                                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                η(p + 1) = T2 Dp+1
                                                                                                                                                               h   TT
                                                                                                                                                                    2 ⊗ I m   η(0)   β(k)
                                                                                                                                                                                              k=0
                                                                                                                                                                p
                                                                                                                                                                X                                          p
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Y
                                                                                                                                                                      T2 Dkh TT2 D ⊗ Im (zH − Hd x(p − k))
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                           +h                                                β(i)
                                                                                                                                                                k=0                                                       i=p−k
                                                                                                                                                                  Xp                                            p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Y
                                                                                                                                                                         T2 Dkh TT2 L ⊗ Im ε(p − k)
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                       (C.12)              + hsr                                                       β(i).
                                                                                                                                                                   k=0                                         i=p−k

                                                                                                                                       By the definition of Dh in (C.10), kDh k2 = max{|1 − hλ2 (L)|, |1 − hλN (L)|}. Thus,
                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                       by using h ∈ (0, λ2 (L)+λ N (L)
                                                                                                                                                                       ) and [17, Lemma 3.1], we obtain that kDh k2 = 1 −
                                                                                                                                       hλ2 (L) = ρ̂h . Taking two-norms of (C.12), by recalling that β(k) ≤ β(0) ∀k ≥ 0,
                                                                                                                                       kDk2 = kT2 k2 = 1, we have the following:
                                                                                                                                                                            p+1                                             p
                                                                                                                                                kη(p + 1)k2 ≤ (β(0)ρ̂h )          kη(0)k2 + hsr β(0)kLk2 (β(0)ρ̂h ) kε(0)k2
                                                                                                                                                                                     p−1
                                                                                                                                                                                     X                 k
                                                                                                                                                                + hsr β(0)kLk2             (β(0)ρ̂h ) kε(p − k)k2
                                                                                                                                                                                     k=0
                                                                                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                                                            X               k
                                                                                                                                                                + hβ(0)           (β(0)ρ̂h ) kzH − Hd x(p − k)k2 .
                                                                                                                                                                            k=0

                                                                                                                                       Note by γ(0) = 1, s(0) = sr , kDk2 = 1, and A2 that
                                                                                                                                                                                                √
                                                                                                                                                       kη(0)k2 = kD ⊗ Im x(0)k2 ≤ kDk2 kx(0)k2 ≤ mN Cx ,
                                                                                                                                                                                         √
                                                                                                                                                                kε(0)k2 ≤ kx(0)k2 /s(0) ≤ mN Cx /sr .




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                            DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                        1219

                                                                                                                                       Similar to (C.9) we can easily show that kx(k)k2 ≤ Mx ∀k = 0, . . . , p. Then by using
                                                                                                                                                              Pp             k      1
                                                                                                                                       (C.5), β(0)ρ̂h < 1, and k=0 (β(0)ρ̂h ) ≤ 1−β(0) ρ̂h , we obtain the following:
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                         √
                                                                                                                                                                    √                                        mN hsr β(0)2 λN (L)
                                                                                                                                                  kη(p + 1)k2 ≤         mN Cx (1 + hβ(0)λN (L)) +
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2(1 − β(0)ρ̂h )
                                                                                                                                                                                                   hβ(0)
                                                                                                                                       (C.13)                       + (kzH k2 + kHd k2 Mx )                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 − β(0)ρ̂h
                                                                                                                                       This together with (26)–(28), (C.4), (C.5), and (C.9) leads to

                                                                                                                                            kθ(p + 1)k∞ ≤ k (ImN + hL ⊗ Im ) ε(p + 1)k∞
                                                                                                                                                              + hs−1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                  r   λN (L)kη(p + 1)k2 + kzH k∞ + kHd k∞ kx(p + 1)k∞
                                                                                                                                                              β(0)(1 + 2hd∗ )
                                                                                                                                                                              + h sr−1 M1 (h, β(0)) + M2 (h, β(0))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                            ≤
                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                            ≤ β(0)(1/2 + hd∗ ) + 2hM2 (h, β(0)) = M 0 (h, β(0))
                                                                                                                                                              l               1m 1                     1         1
                                                                                                                                                            ≤ M 0 (h, β(0)) −    + = K0 (h, β(0)) + ≤ K + .
                                                                                                                                                                              2    2                   2         2
                                                                                                                                           As a result, when k = p + 1, the quantizer is also unsaturated. Therefore, by
                                                                                                                                       induction, we conclude that if a (2K + 1)-levels uniform quantizer is applied, then the
                                                                                                                                       quantizer will never be saturated.
                                                                                                                                            C.2. Proof of Theorem 4.4. From Proposition 4.2 it follows that (C.13) holds
                                                                                                                                       for any p ≥ 0. This implies that supk≥1 kη(k)k∞ < ∞. Then using the definition of
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PN
                                                                                                                                       η(k) in (A.1c), we obtain that kxi (k) − y(k)k∞ = O(γ(k)), where yk =  i=1 xi,k /N.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1   T
                                                                                                                                       Then by multiplying both sides of (A.4) from the left by N 1N ⊗ Im and using
                                                                                                                                       1TN L = 0TN , we obtain that
                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                    hγ(k) X
                                                                                                                                                yk+1 = yk − hγ(k)(HT Hyk − HT z)/N −                        hi h>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                i (xi,k − yk ) .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     N i=1

                                                                                                                                       Then by recalling that y? = (HT H)−1 HT z, we obtain that
                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                           hγ(k) T                  hγ(k) X
                                                                                                                                        yk+1 − yLS ∗ = yk − yLS ∗ −             H H (yk − yLS ∗ ) −         hi h>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                i (xi,k − yk ) .
                                                                                                                                                                            N                        N i=1

                                                                                                                                       Because γ(k) monotone decreases to zero by A6, by kxi (k) − y(k)k∞ = O(γ(k)) we
                                                                                                                                       conclude that limk→∞ (xi,k − yk ) = 0. Since HT H is positive definite by rank(H) =
                                                                                                                                       m, from [3, Lemma 3.1.1] it follows that limk→∞ yk = yLS ∗ , which together with
                                                                                                                                       xi (k) − y(k) → 0 implies (29). Then by kxi (k) − y(k)k∞ = O(γ(k)) and applying [3,
                                                                                                                                       Theorem 3.1.1], we obtain that for any k ≥ 1, ky(k) − yLS ∗ k∞ = O(γ(k)). Thus, (30)
                                                                                                                                       holds.
                                                                                                                                             C.3. Proof of Theorem 4.6. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 3.6. So,
                                                                                                                                       we just show the key steps and skip the detailed calculations. Using ρ̂h = 1 − hλ2 (L),
                                                                                                                                                   (L)
                                                                                                                                       κN = λλN2 (L)   , (26), and (27), we obtain that limh→0 M 0 (h, 1) = 21 . Then there exists
                                                                                                                                       h∗ ∈ 0, min λ2 (L)+λ     2             1
                                                                                                                                                                                          such that M 0 (h∗ , 1) ≤ K for any K ≥ 1. By
                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                  N (L) , λmin (Pd )
                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                       recalling the definition of M (h, β(0)) in (26), limβ(0)→1 M 0 (h∗ , β(0)) = M 0 (h∗ , 1) ≤
                                                                                                                                       K. Then there exists β ∗ (0) ∈ (1, 1−hλ       1
                                                                                                                                                                                       2 (L
                                                                                                                                                                                            ) such that M 0 (h∗ , β ∗ (0)) ≤ K+ 21 . Therefore,
                                                                                                                                       (h∗ , β ∗ (0)) ∈ Ξ0K . Hence Ξ0K is nonempty.




                                                                                                                                            Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1220                   J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                           For any (h, β(0)) ∈ Ξ0K , by (31) we have h ∈ 0, min λ2 (L)+λ       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       , λmin1(Pd ) ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N (L)
                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                             , and M 0 (h, β(0)) ≤ K + 21 . Then by definition (26), K0 (h, β(0)) =
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                       β(0) ∈ 1, 1−hλ 2 (L
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                        0             1
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                        M (h, β(0)) − 2 ≤ K, which together with Theorem 4.4 completes the proof.

                                                                                                                                                                                REFERENCES

                                                                                                                                        [1] B. D. O. Anderson, S. Mou, A. S. Morse, and U. Helmke, Decentralized gradient algorithm
                                                                                                                                                for solution of a linear equation, Numer. Algebra Control Optim., 6 (2016), pp. 319–328.
                                                                                                                                        [2] R. W. Brockett and D. Liberzon, Quantized feedback stabilization of linear systems, IEEE
                                                                                                                                                Trans. Automat. Control, 45 (2000), pp. 1279–1289.
                                                                                                                                        [3] H.-F. Chen, Stochastic Approximation and Its Applications, Nonconvex Optim. Appl. 64,
                                                                                                                                                Springer, New York, 2006.
                                                                                                                                        [4] A. G. Dimakis, S. Kar, J. M. Moura, M. G. Rabbat, and A. Scaglione, Gossip algorithms
                                                                                                                                                for distributed signal processing, Proc. IEEE, 98 (2010), pp. 1847–1864.
                                                                                                                                        [5] J. C. Duchi, A. Agarwal, and M. J. Wainwright, Dual averaging for distributed optimiza-
                                                                                                                                                tion: Convergence analysis and network scaling, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 57 (2012),
                                                                                                                                                pp. 592–606.
                                                                                                                                        [6] P. Frasca, R. Carli, F. Fagnani, and S. Zampieri, Average consensus on networks
                                                                                                                                                with quantized communication, Internat. J. Robust Nonlinear Control, 19 (2009), pp.
                                                                                                                                                1787–1816.
                                                                                                                                        [7] M. Garland, S. Le Grand, J. Nickolls, J. Anderson, J. Hardwick, S. Morton,
                                                                                                                                                E. Phillips, Y. Zhang, and V. Volkov, Parallel computing experiences with CUDA,
                                                                                                                                                IEEE Micro, 28 (2008), pp. 13–27.
                                                                                                                                        [8] A. Jadbabaie, J. Lin, and A. S. Morse, Coordination of groups of mobile autonomous agents
                                                                                                                                                using nearest neighbor rules, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 48 (2003), pp. 988–1001.
                                                                                                                                        [9] S. Kar, J. M. Moura, and K. Ramanan, Distributed parameter estimation in sensor networks:
                                                                                                                                                Nonlinear observation models and imperfect communication, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
                                                                                                                                                58 (2012), pp. 3575–3605.
                                                                                                                                       [10] A. Kashyap, T. Başar, and R. Srikant, Quantized consensus, Automatica, 43 (2007),
                                                                                                                                                pp. 1192–1203.
                                                                                                                                       [11] S. W. Keckler, W. J. Dally, B. Khailany, M. Garland, and D. Glasco, GPUs and the
                                                                                                                                                future of parallel computing, IEEE Micro, 31 (2011), pp. 7–17.
                                                                                                                                       [12] C. E. Lee, A. Ozdaglar, and D. Shah, Solving Systems of Linear Equations: Locally and
                                                                                                                                                Asynchronously, Computing Research Repository, 2014.
                                                                                                                                       [13] C.-S. Lee, N. Michelusi, and G. Scutari, Finite rate quantized distributed optimization
                                                                                                                                                with geometric convergence, in Proceedings of the 52nd Asilomar Conference on Signals,
                                                                                                                                                Systems, and Computers, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1876–1880.
                                                                                                                                       [14] J. Lei and H.-F. Chen, Distributed randomized pagerank algorithm based on stochastic ap-
                                                                                                                                                proximation, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 60 (2015), pp. 1641–1646.
                                                                                                                                       [15] J. Lei, H.-F. Chen, and H.-T. Fang, Primal–dual algorithm for distributed constrained opti-
                                                                                                                                                mization, Systems Control Lett., 96 (2016), pp. 110–117.
                                                                                                                                       [16] J. Lei, P. Yi, G. Shi, and B. D. O. Anderson, Network linear equations with finite data
                                                                                                                                                rates, in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, IEEE, 2018, pp.
                                                                                                                                                3373–3378.
                                                                                                                                       [17] T. Li, M. Fu, L. Xie, and J.-F. Zhang, Distributed consensus with limited communication
                                                                                                                                                data rate, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 56 (2011), pp. 279–292.
                                                                                                                                       [18] I. Lobel, A. Ozdaglar, and D. Feijer, Distributed multi-agent optimization with state-
                                                                                                                                                dependent communication, Math. Program., 129 (2011), pp. 255–284.
                                                                                                                                       [19] J. Lu and C. Y. Tang, Distributed asynchronous algorithms for solving positive definite linear
                                                                                                                                                equations over networks—Part I: Agent networks, IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 42 (2009),
                                                                                                                                                pp. 252–257.
                                                                                                                                       [20] J. Lu and C. Y. Tang, Distributed asynchronous algorithms for solving positive definite lin-
                                                                                                                                                ear equations over networks—part II: Wireless networks, IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 42
                                                                                                                                                (2009), pp. 258–263.
                                                                                                                                       [21] S. Magnússon, C. Enyioha, N. Li, C. Fischione, and V. Tarokh, Communication complexity
                                                                                                                                                of dual decomposition methods for distributed resource allocation optimization, IEEE J.
                                                                                                                                                Selected Topics Signal Process., 12 (2018), pp. 717–732.
                                                                                                                                       [22] S. Magnússon, H. Shokri-Ghadikolaei, and N. Li, On Maintaining Linear Convergence of
                                                                                                                                                Distributed Learning and Optimization Under Limited Communication, https://arxiv.org/
                                                                                                                                                abs/1902.11163, 2019.




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                                           DATA RATES FOR NETWORK LINEAR EQUATIONS                                  1221

                                                                                                                                       [23] R. Mehmood and J. Crowcroft, Parallel Iterative Solution Method for Large Sparse Linear
                                                                                                                                                Equation Systems, Tech. report, Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, 2005.
                                                                                                                                       [24] D. Mosk-Aoyama, T. Roughgarden, and D. Shah, Fully distributed algorithms for convex
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                optimization problems, SIAM J. Optim., 20 (2010), pp. 3260–3279.
                                                                                                                                       [25] S. Mou, J. Liu, and A. S. Morse, A distributed algorithm for solving a linear algebraic
                                                                                                                                                equation, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 60 (2015), pp. 2863–2878.
                                                                                                                                       [26] S. Mou and A. Morse, A fixed-neighbor, distributed algorithm for solving a linear algebraic
                                                                                                                                                equation, in Proceedings of ECC, IEEE, 2013, pp. 2269–2273.
                                                                                                                                       [27] G. N. Nair, F. Fagnani, S. Zampieri, and R. J. Evans, Feedback control under data rate
                                                                                                                                                constraints: An overview, Proc. IEEE, 95 (2007), pp. 108–137.
                                                                                                                                       [28] A. Nedic, A. Olshevsky, and W. Shi, Achieving geometric convergence for distributed opti-
                                                                                                                                                mization over time-varying graphs, SIAM J. Optim., 27 (2017), pp. 2597–2633.
                                                                                                                                       [29] A. Nedić, A. Olshevsky, W. Shi, and C. A. Uribe, Geometrically convergent distributed
                                                                                                                                                optimization with uncoordinated step-sizes, in Proceedings of the American Control Con-
                                                                                                                                                ference, IEEE, 2017, pp. 3950–3955.
                                                                                                                                       [30] A. Nedić and A. Ozdaglar, Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimization,
                                                                                                                                                IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 54 (2009), pp. 48–61.
                                                                                                                                       [31] A. Nedić, A. Ozdaglar, and P. A. Parrilo, Constrained consensus and optimization in
                                                                                                                                                multi-agent networks, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 55 (2010), pp. 922–938.
                                                                                                                                       [32] Z. Qiu, L. Xie, and Y. Hong, Quantized leaderless and leader-following consensus of high-
                                                                                                                                                order multi-agent systems with limited data rate, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 61 (2016),
                                                                                                                                                pp. 2432–2447.
                                                                                                                                       [33] G. Qu and N. Li, Harnessing smoothness to accelerate distributed optimization, IEEE Trans.
                                                                                                                                                Control Netw. Syst., 5 (2017), pp. 1245–1260.
                                                                                                                                       [34] M. Rabbat and R. Nowak, Distributed optimization in sensor networks, in Proceedings of the
                                                                                                                                                3rd International Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, ACM, 2004,
                                                                                                                                                pp. 20–27.
                                                                                                                                       [35] M. G. Rabbat and R. D. Nowak, Quantized incremental algorithms for distributed optimiza-
                                                                                                                                                tion, IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun., 23 (2005), pp. 798–808.
                                                                                                                                       [36] A. Reisizadeh, A. Mokhtari, H. Hassani, and R. Pedarsani, An exact quantized decentral-
                                                                                                                                                ized gradient descent algorithm, IEEE Trans. Signal Process., 67 (2019), pp. 4934–4947.
                                                                                                                                       [37] Y. Saad and M. Sosonkina, Distributed Schur complement techniques for general sparse linear
                                                                                                                                                systems, SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 21 (1999), pp. 1337–1356.
                                                                                                                                       [38] G. Shi, B. D. O. Anderson, and U. Helmke, Network flows that solve linear equations, IEEE
                                                                                                                                                Trans. Automat. Control, 62 (2017), pp. 2659–2674.
                                                                                                                                       [39] G. Shi, K. H. Johansson, and Y. Hong, Reaching an optimal consensus: Dynamical sys-
                                                                                                                                                tems that compute intersections of convex sets, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 58 (2013),
                                                                                                                                                pp. 610–622.
                                                                                                                                       [40] W. Shi, Q. Ling, G. Wu, and W. Yin, Extra: An exact first-order algorithm for decentralized
                                                                                                                                                consensus optimization, SIAM J. Optim., 25 (2015), pp. 944–966.
                                                                                                                                       [41] H. Tang, S. Gan, C. Zhang, T. Zhang, and J. Liu, Communication compression for de-
                                                                                                                                                centralized training, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018, pp.
                                                                                                                                                7663–7673.
                                                                                                                                       [42] J. Tsitsiklis, D. Bertsekas, and M. Athans, Distributed asynchronous deterministic and
                                                                                                                                                stochastic gradient optimization algorithms, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 31 (1986),
                                                                                                                                                pp. 803–812.
                                                                                                                                       [43] R. Tutunov, H. B. Ammar, and A. Jadbabaie, A Fast Distributed Solver for Symmetric
                                                                                                                                                Diagonally Dominant Linear Equations, https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03158, 2015.
                                                                                                                                       [44] J. Von Neumann, On rings of operators. reduction theory, Ann. of Math., 50 (1949), pp.
                                                                                                                                                401–485.
                                                                                                                                       [45] J. Wu, W. Huang, J. Huang, and T. Zhang, Error compensated quantized SGD and its
                                                                                                                                                applications to large-scale distributed optimization, in Proceedings of the International
                                                                                                                                                Conference on Machine Learning, 2018, pp. 5321–5329.
                                                                                                                                       [46] L. Xiao and S. Boyd, Fast linear iterations for distributed averaging, Systems Control Lett.,
                                                                                                                                                53 (2004), pp. 65–78.
                                                                                                                                       [47] P. Yi and Y. Hong, Quantized subgradient algorithm and data-rate analysis for distributed
                                                                                                                                                optimization, IEEE Trans. Control Netw. Syst., 1 (2014), pp. 380–392.
                                                                                                                                       [48] M. Yu, Z. Lin, K. Narra, S. Li, Y. Li, N. S. Kim, A. Schwing, M. Annavaram, and
                                                                                                                                                S. Avestimehr, GradiVeQ: Vector quantization for bandwidth-efficient gradient aggrega-
                                                                                                                                                tion in distributed CNN training, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
                                                                                                                                                2018, pp. 5129–5139.




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
                                                                                                                                       1222                  J. LEI, P. YI, G. SHI, AND B. D. O. ANDERSON


                                                                                                                                       [49] K. Yuan, Q. Ling, and W. Yin, On the convergence of decentralized gradient descent, SIAM
                                                                                                                                                J. Optim., 26 (2016), pp. 1835–1854.
                                                                                                                                       [50] A. Zouzias and N. M. Freris, Randomized extended kaczmarz for solving least squares, SIAM
Downloaded 04/29/24 to 101.115.74.17 . Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/terms-privacy




                                                                                                                                                J. Matrix Anal. Appl., 34 (2013), pp. 773–793.




                                                                                                                                           Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
